= General Information

All trademarks used in this document are the trademarks of their
respective owners.

Standard disclaimers apply.

== What's the difference between all these font formats?

This question is not trivial to answer. It's analogous to asking what
the difference is between various graphics image file formats. The
short, somewhat pragmatic answer, is simply that they are different ways
of representing the same “information” and some of them will work with
your software/printer and others won't.

At one level, there are two major sorts of fonts: bitmapped and outline
(scalable). Bitmapped fonts are falling out of fashion as various
outline technologies grow in popularity and support.

Bitmapped fonts represent each character as a rectangular grid of
pixels. The bitmap for each character indicates precisely what pixels
should be on and off. Printing a bitmapped character is simply a matter
of blasting the right bits out to the printer. There are a number of
disadvantages to this approach. The bitmap represents a particular
instance of the character at a particular size and resolution. It is
very difficult to change the size, shape, or resolution of a bitmapped
character without significant loss of quality in the image. On the other
hand, it's easy to do things like shading and filling with bitmapped
characters.

Outline fonts represent each character mathematically as a series of
lines, curves, and 'hints'. When a character from an outline font is to
be printed, it must be 'rasterized' into a bitmap “on the fly”.
PostScript printers, for example, do this in the print engine. If the
“engine” in the output device cannot do the rasterizing, some front end
has to do it first. Many of the disadvantages that are inherent in the
bitmapped format are not present in outline fonts at all. Because an
outline font is represented mathematically, it can be drawn at any
reasonable size. At small sizes, the font renderer is guided by the
'hints' in the font; at very small sizes, particularly on low-resolution
output devices such as screens, automatically scaled fonts become
unreadable, and hand-tuned bitmaps are a better choice (if they are
available). Additionally, because it is rasterized “on demand,” the font
can be adjusted for different resolutions and 'aspect ratios'.

Werenfried Spit adds the following remark:

Well designed fonts are not scalable. I.e. a well designed 5pt font is
not simply its 10pt counterpart 50% scaled down. (One can verify this by
blowing up some small print in a copier and compare it with large print;
or see the example for computer modern in D.E. Knuth's TeXbook.)
Although this fact has no direct implications for any of the two methods
of font representation it has an indirect one: users and word processor
designers tend to blow up their 10pt fonts to 20pt or scale them down to
5pt given this possibility. Subtle details, but well...

LaserJet .SFP and .SFL files, TeX PK, PXL, and GF files, Macintosh
Screen Fonts, and GEM .GFX files are all examples of bitmapped font
formats.

PostScript Type 1, Type 3, and Type 5 fonts, Nimbus Q fonts, TrueType
fonts, Sun F3, MetaFont .mf files, and LaserJet .SFS files are all
examples of outline font formats.

Neither of these lists is even close to being exhaustive.

To complicate the issue further, identical formats on different
platforms are not necessarily the same. For example Type 1 fonts on the
Macintosh are not directly usable under MS-DOS or Unix, and vice-versa.

It has been pointed out that the following description shows signs of
its age (for example, the eexec encryption has been thoroughly hacked).
I don't dispute the observation and I encourage anyone with the
knowledge and time to submit a more up to date description.

It has further been suggested that this commentary is biased toward
Kingsley/ATF. The omission of details about Bitstream (and possibly
Bauer) may be considered serious since their software lies inside many
3rd-party PostScript interpreters.

The moderators of this FAQ would gladly accept other descriptions/
explanations/viewpoints on the issues discussed in this (and every
other) section.

pass:[[Ed Note: Liam R. E. Quin supplied many changes to the following section
in an attempt to bring it up to date. Hopefully it is a better
reflection of the state of the world today (12/07/92) than it was in
earlier FAQs]]

Henry Schneiker `reachable electronically?` wrote the following
description of the differences between several scalable font
technologies:

((( semi-quote )))

There has been a lot of confusion about font technologies in recent
times, especially when it comes to Type 1 versus Type 3 fonts, “hints,”
PostScript compatibility, encryption, character regularizing, kerning,
and the like.

Encryption (eexec)::
  All fonts produced with Adobe's font technology are protected through
  data encryption. The decryption is provided by the `eexec' (encrypted
  execute) PostScript operator and, until recently, was only present in
  Adobe's licensed PostScript.
  +
  Adobe has published the details of the Type 1 font format in the
  `Black Book', Adobe Type 1 Font Format (version 1.1), Adobe Systems
  Inc., 1990. The encryption was mainly used because of font copyright
  problems; unencrypted fonts can also be used, but these tend to use an
  efficient binary encoding, also in documented the Type 1 book, and so
  are still not readable PostScript.
Type 1, Type 3, and Type 5 font formats::
  There are generally three font formats used in Adobe PostScript
  printers: Type 1, Type 3, and Type 5. Type 1 fonts are Adobe's
  downloadable format. Type 3 fonts are third-party downloadable format.
  Type 5 fonts are the ROM-based fonts that are part of your printer.
  +
  There is no functional difference between a Type 1, Type 3, or Type 5
  font. A Type 3 font can do anything a Type 1 or Type 5 font can do.
  The only real difference between them is where the `BuildChar' routine
  comes from. For Type 1 and Type 5 fonts it's built into the printer.
  For Type 3 fonts it's built into the font. In other words, anything a
  Type 1 font can do a Type 3 font can also do.
  +
  pass:[[Ed note: the reverse is not true. Type3 fonts can do things that
  Type1 fonts cannot. But they aren't hinted...]]
  +
  When PostScript is asked to generate a character, PostScript looks in
  the font's dictionary for FontType. If FontType is 1 or 5 PostScript
  executes an internal routine that knows how to interpret the font data
  stored in CharStrings. If FontType is 3 PostScript executes the
  routine BuildChar from the font's dictionary to interpret the font
  data (often stored in CharStrings).
  +
  However, each BuildChar routine is written to read data formatted in a
  method convenient to the vendor. Adobe, Altsys, Bitstream, and
  Kingsley/ATF all format their font data differently and, hence, have
  different BuildChar routines.
  +
  pass:[[Ed note: relative hard disk efficiency of Kingsley vs. Adobe fonts
  deleted on 12/07/92]]
  +
  Type 5 fonts are special in that they often include hand-tuned bitmaps
  for the commonly used sizes, such as 10- and 12-point. Other sizes are
  generated from the outlines in normal fashion.
  +
  Don't confuse Type 1, Type 3, and Type 5 fonts with Bitstream's Type
  A, Type B, Type C, and Type F. They are not the same and serve only to
  confuse the issue.
Resolution `hints'::
  When a character is described in outline format the outline has
  unlimited resolution. If you make it ten times as big, it is just as
  accurate as if it were ten times as small.
  +
  However, to be of use, we must transfer the character outline to a
  sheet of paper through a device called a raster image processor (RIP).
  The RIP builds the image of the character out of lots of little
  squares called picture elements (pixels).
  +
  The problem is, a pixel has physical size and can be printed only as
  either black or white. Look at a sheet of graph paper. Rows and
  columns of little squares (think: pixels). Draw a large `O' in the
  middle of the graph paper. Darken in all the squares touched by the O.
  Do the darkened squares form a letter that looks like the O you drew?
  This is the problem with low resolution (300 dpi). Which pixels do you
  turn on and which do you leave off to most accurately reproduce the
  character?
  +
  All methods of hinting strive to fit (map) the outline of a character
  onto the pixel grid and produce the most pleasing/recognizable
  character no matter how coarse the grid is.
  +
  pass:[[Ed note: deleted some paragraphs that are no longer true. Times
  change...]]

Optical Scaling::
  Optical Scaling modifies the relative shape of a character to
  compensate for the visual effects of changing a character's size. As a
  character gets smaller, the relative thickness of strokes, the size of
  serifs, the width of the character, the inter-character spacing, and
  inter-line spacing should increase. Conversely, as a character gets
  larger, the relative thickness, widths, and spacing should decrease.
  +
  Contrast this with linear scaling, in which all parts of a character
  get larger or smaller at the same rate, making large characters look
  wide and heavy (strokes are too thick, serifs are too big) while small
  characters look thin and weak.
Kerning::
  As applied to PostScript fonts, kerning refers to kern pairs. A kern
  pair specifies two characters (e.g., A and V) and the distance to move
  the second character relative to the first. The typical use of a kern
  pair is to remove excessive space between a pair of characters.
  However, it may also be used to add space.
PostScript clones::
  There are currently several printer manufacturers on the market with
  PostScript clones. To be viable, a PostScript clone must comply with
  the `red book' (PS Language Reference Manual).
  +
  In order to avoid paying royalties to Adobe, and because Adobe's Type
  1 font format was originally proprietary, many PostScript interpreters
  use some other font format. Sun uses F3, and some other vendors use
  Bitstream's Speedo format, for example. The only real problem this
  causes is that the widths of characters (the `font metrics') may vary
  from Adobe's, so that programs that assume the Adobe character widths
  will produce poor quality output. Bitstream fonts used to be
  particularly bad in the early days, but they and most or all of the
  other vendors have solved those problems.
Apple TrueType::
  pass:[[Ed note: formerly “Royal (`sfnt')”]] format and System 7
  +
  Apple's new System 7.0 supports a new format of outline font that will
  allow high-quality characters of any size to be displayed on the
  screen. TrueType stores font outlines as B-spline curves along with
  programmed resolution hints. B-spline curves are faster to compute and
  easier to manipulate than the Bezier curves used in PostScript.
  +
  Adobe is not going to support Apple's new format by converting the
  Adobe/Linotype library to B-spline format. There are two reasons for
  this: First, there is no support for font encryption (yes, the hooks
  are there, but nothing is implemented). Second, Adobe does not want to
  dilute PostScript and its font library. However, the Macintosh is too
  big a market to simply turn away from. Therefore, Adobe will provide
  its Font Manager to display its own fonts on the Mac screen. Apple
  ships Adobe's ATM for this purpose.

((( unquote )))

== What about “Multiple Master” fonts?

Multiple Master Fonts are an extension to the Adobe font format.
providing the ability to interpolate smoothly between several “design
axes” from a single font. Design axes can include weight, size, and even
some whacko notions like serif to sans serif. Adobes' first Multiple
Master Font was Myriad -- a two-axis font with WEIGHT (light to black)
on one axis, and WIDTH (condensed to expanded) along the other axis. In
the case of Myriad, there are four “polar” designs at the “corners” of
the design space. The four designs are light condensed, black condensed,
light expanded, and black expanded.

Given polar designs, you can set up a “weight vector” which interpolates
to any point within the design space to produce a unique font for a
specific purpose. So you can get a “more or less condensed, somewhat
black face”.

Multiple Master Fonts can be used on any PostScript printer. Multiple
Master Fonts need a new PostScript operator known as makeblendedfont.
The current crop of Multiple Master Fonts supply an emulation of this
operator so the printer doesn't need this operator.

A short tutorial on Multiple Master Fonts and makeblendedfont appears in
PostScript by Example, by Henry McGilton and Mary Campione, published by
Addison-Wesley.

Danny Thomas contributes that there are a few PostScript interpreter
(version)s which have bugs that appear with the emulation of the
makeblendedfont operator used to support Multiple Master fonts. There
weren't many exhibiting this problem, though it may have happened even
with one Adobe interpreter.

== Is there a methodology to describe and classify typefaces?

There is a standard, Panose, but it is mostly ignored by typographers
(not because it's bad, just because they don't need it). The Panose
system is documented, among other places, in the Microsoft Windows 3.1
Programmer's Reference from Microsoft Press.

The ISO also has a scheme, but it is not Panose.

At least one book by a respected authority, Alexander Lawson, Printing
Types: An Introduction, describes another, less rigorous system
pass:[[ed: of his own]], which is exposited in “An Introduction” and used without
exposition in his later “Anatomy of a Typeface”.

There is another book, Rookledges International Typefinder, which has a
very complete system that uses tell-tales of individual glyphs as well
as overall style to index most known faces right in the book.

pass:[J. Ben Leiberman] has another book on type face description.

Terry O'Donnell adds the following comments:

The current ISO system was initiated (I believe) by Archie Provan of
RIT—a successor to Mr. Lawson. Whereas in typographic practice or
teaching—only a high level classification is necessary - times have
changed and the current ISO system aims to accomplish something beyond
the high level. A major goal is to aid software to help users make
selections. For example, a naive user might ask for all fonts on a font
server which have a Roman old style appearance. Another goal would be to
help users with multi-lingual text: a user creating a document in
English using e.g. Baskerville wants to know what Arabic or Japanese
language font on his system/file server would harmonize well with the
Baskerville. It is not all in place yet—but the more detailed ISO
classes—and the current addition of non-latin typefaces—are an
attempt to address this issue.

A second goal is to help with the font substitution problem. Neither ISO
or Panose address the metrics issues in font substitution—but both
might aid software in picking the nearest style of available available
fonts.

== What about “Colonial” Typefaces?

=== Why does colonial printing have that “Colonial” feel?

Colonial type was either very roughly treated by moist salt air on the
crossing and in colonial port cities, or was copied locally by tacky
techniques (such as driving used foundry type into soft lead to make
very soft deformable matrices), and the paper was very rough, which
abrades both the serifs and the hairlines. So except for the best work
done with new, european types, the serifs were much smaller, even broken
off, than the original founder/punchcutter intended. Thins could be
abraded by rough paper to nothingness, esp after humid salt air had
leached the hardener out of the alloy.

Peter Honig contributes the following alternative explanation of the
roughness of colonial types:

The roughness of early fonts was caused by several factors: Type was
quite expensive and was used for many years (even if somewhat damaged).
Also, printing presses would only be set up to print one side of one
folio at a time, so you would not need to set more than a couple of
pages at once. This meant that the printer did not need as many copies
of each character, however, each character got used very frequently. The
early casting techniques did not produce as perfect or consistant
examples as we have today. That is, the face of a character might not be
quite planar with the page, or its sides might not be quite parallel.
Lastly, the inks of the past were not as advanced those of today.

=== What fonts are good for mock-colonial uses?

For example, what fonts have the following features: old-style figures
(non-lining numbers), the long s character, slightly irregular shapes
(like type produced by colonial printers), and a decent complement of
ligatures. And what about free or cheap faces like this?

I don't know if any exist with all of 1-5. As I believe you get what you
pay for, especially in fonts, I haven't looked at free and cheap-copy
fonts.

Microsoft's expansion set for their Win3.1 optional fonts has Garamond
Expert & Expert Extensions, which has a good complement of ligatures and
I think I remember it having the long ess too. I forget about OSFigs; it
should tho'. Monotype's metal faces “16th Century Roman” and
“Poliphilus” may be available in digital; if so, they imitate early
presswork with early and are very close to what one wants.

“A commercial supplier pass:[[not yet sampled]] is Image Club Graphics in
Calgary (1-800-661-9410). It is called Caslon Antique. It is supplied as
both roman and italic, together, for $25. They advertise in
MacWorld/MacUser/MacBlah. I am unable to tell from abcDEF123 if the
numerals are old-style, but I think not. Ligatures? long-S? Not yet
known. Guillemots, though, are there. ... Letraset, circa 1977, showing
a Caslon Antique with modern numerals, no ligatures, and only UKPounds
and German ss extensions.” pass:[[Ike Stoddard]]

NB: Caslon Antique is not a Caslon per se: “The last Caslon to mention
is that ubiquitous but unrelated Caslon Antique, which possesses no
similarity whatsoever to the original. This old reprobate was introduced
by Barnhart Brothers of Chicago under the name Fifteenth Century. Its
negative reception lasted until about 1918, when, with a simple name
change to Caslon Antique, it became the most commonly selected type for
reproductions of colonial American printing. It is now seen in
everything from liquor advertisments to furniture commercials”
pass:[[Lawson, 1990,Anatomy]]

Miles Agfa (Compugraphic) has always had a Caslon Antique; I don't know
if it is available for TrueType or Type 1, but Agfa has been doing
TrueType bundles at reasonable prices. pass:[[wdr]]

Peter Honig contributes the following suggestions:

Poliphilus::
  A cleaned-up reproduction of type from 1499. It's only slightly
  irregular and does not contain the long S, but does have old style
  figures. From Italy, founded by Francesco Griffo.
Old Claude::
  An exact reproduction of Garamond from 1532. It is irregular and does
  not contain the long S, but it does have old style figures. From
  France, founded by Claude Garamond.
Blado::
  An exact reproduction of type from 1539. It is irregular and does not
  contain the long S, but it does have old style figures. From Italy,
  founded by Antinio Blado (designed by Ludovico delgi Arrighi).
Van Dijck::
  An exact reproduction of type from the 1660s. It is irregular and does
  not contain the long S, but it does have old style figures. From
  Holland, founded by Van Dijck.
Adobe Caslon::
  A cleaned-up reproduction of type from the 1720s. It isn't irregular
  but it does contain the long S, old style figures, and several
  ligatures. From England, founded by William Caslon.

Blado, Poliphilus, and Van Dijck are available from Monotype. Adobe
Caslon is available from Adobe. Old Claude is available from Letter
Perfect. In my opinion, Old Claude is font that is worthy of close
attention. Although it lacks the long S, it is VERY accurately
reproduced. Although Adobe Caslon is not irregular, it has a great set
of authentic ornaments from the Renaissance and Baroque. It is also the
only set that I am aware of, that has the long S and its ligatures.

Bill Troop notes:

I do not believe that Monotype ever had a font called
16th Century Roman. You are thinking of a private face created by Paul
Hayden-Duensing for his private press based on old Italian punches. It
is very rough indeed, but I can assure you no Colonial printer had a
typeface as stylish.

Poliphilus does indeed exist in digital form, and is fairly faithful,
but again is far too stylish to give the proper feel of US Colonial
printing. Nor is Antique Caslon, so called, anything to do with the
Caslon types used by American printers--except those who used this bogus
type at the end of the 19th century.

Monotype Bell is a faithful copy of a font that was actually used in the
US, but it is far more modern than the Caslon types. Nobody has yet done
a really authentic Caslon, and it is a curious fact, but none of the
Caslon revivals, in any of metal, photo, or digital formats, has ever
been based on the best Caslon sizes. I have been toying with such a
revival.

Monotype Van Dijk can hardly be called a faithful copy of a metal font;
the outlines are far more regular, for instance, than what Monotype did
for Bell. In addition, the less interesting forms of the lower case f
and f-ligatures were chosen for the digital version, and the alternate f
was not supplied. That makes it a very uninteresting font to use in
digital form. In addition, the italic has been unbelievably badly spaced
in the digital version. (Harry Carter complained about the spacing in
the 13pt Roman in the metal version.)

For anyone wishing to recreate the feel of early-to-mid 18th century
printing, a battered, sensitive revival of Caslon would be desirable.
The Giampa version is interesting, but is based on a poor model.

=== What fonts could a colonial printer have had?

According to D.B.Updike in the classic reference “Printing Types: Their
History, Forms & Use”, he indicates that most colonial work was with
types of the Caslon Old Style fonts and cheap copies of same in the 18th
C. Before that, it would have been the older Dutch & English faces,
almost always lagging English tastes. If you can find the Oxford Fell
types, they are classic Dutch-as-used-by-englishmen. Anything with a
Dutch moniker and the Oldstyle adjective is probably ok; Van Dijck if
you find it, say (died 1673).

Ben Franklin recommended Caslon faces. But these were not available in
England before 1720, first full broadside in 1734. Lawson declares that
the first printing of the Declaration of Independance was in Caslon.

Wilson's Scotch Modern was the “modern” font that surfaced in quantity
in america. If the Scotch Roman your vendor has is sort-of like-Bodoni
but nicer than his Bodoni, that's it. It wasn't available until late
1700s, though.

== What is “Point Size”?

This article was constructed from a posting by William D. Ricker from
Sep 1992.

In general terms, point size is a relative measure of the size of a
font. It used to have a more concrete meaning in the “old days” of
typeography.

In the world of Photo-typesetters and digital fonts, the distance from
the top of the tallest ascender to the bottom of the longest descender
is only an approximate lower bound on the point size of a font; in the
Old days, it was almost always a firm lower bound, and there was warning
on the exception.

Point-size is the measure of _default_ or _minimum_ inter-baseline
distance; inter line distance in absense of leading, a/k/a “set solid”.
If you don't know if the text was set solid or leaded, you can't tell
the point-size with a measuring glass unless you know if the type design
includes built-in space betweed adjacent, set-solid lines.

Exceptions to the points size equals ascender to descender size rule:

* In metal, there was usually a little room between the highest and
lowest corners of the face and the body size, so that the Matrix was
completely molding the face and not relying on the mold-body to form a
vertical side to the printing face—since a bevel or beard is desirable
for impression and strength.
* If the designer of a face thinks it should always be set leaded, s/he
may choose to include the minimal leading in the design, in which case
it is included in the base point size, and no capital,
lowercase-ascender, or lowercase-descender will get very near the edges.
* In some faces the capitals are taller than the ascenders, and others
vice versa. (Vertical sticks on capitals are called stems, not
ascenders.) A minimum point size estimate would normally be the height
of the font's "envelope", to borrow from Avionics/Aeronautics.
* The point size of a “Titling Face” may not include descenders; in
which case the Q's tail hangs off the body as a vertical kern. Such a
face in metal usually has “Titling” in the name, although sometimes the
fact that only capitals are available is all the hint given.
+
([William D. Ricker's] metal font of _Ray Shaded_, cast on a Monotype
Display caster, has “vertical kerns” if you will: the hanging shaded
tail of the Q and some punctuation below the 24pt body, because it has
no lower-case. It might be better described as being 36/24, thirty-six
point type cast on a twenty-four point body, since the cap A is about
the height and density of a Ultrabold 36pt A in many other fonts. It
would be called 36/24 Caps if a lowercase had been cast on a 36 point
body, but since only UC was ever cut, as UC-only titling, it was
standardly issued and refered to as a 24 point titling—much to the
confusion of non-cognoscenti.)
* The Continental Point, a/k/a the Didot point, (and its Pica Em
equivalent, the Cicero) is just a hair longer. 15 Ciceros=16 Picas, 15
Didots=16 Points. So type which is imported or cast from imported
matrices has been, and still is, cast on the next size larger body in
anglo-american points. So an 11D/12 or 12D/14 type will look larger than
a similar 12pt font but smaller than a simlar 14pt font, by about a
point of fixed built-in leading that the designer didn't intend. What
happened when these faces were converted to photo and digital
composition, I don't know. (I could find out.) Probably some were scaled
to American sizes proportionally from the european masters, some copied
from the American castings with built-in leading to ease conversion, and
some were probably done both ways at different conversion houses.

Net result: unless you know it's _Adobe Times Roman_ or whatever and
just want to know what point size & leading options were, you can't
measure the size with a definition and an optical micrometer. The
defnition is embodied/manifested in the typesetting “hardware”, even if
it is software, not the product.

=== Knuth's Assertion

What about Knuth's assertion that point size is “a more-or-less
arbitrary number that reflects the size of type [a font] is intended to
blend with”?

That statement is true only in the context of MetaFonts. MetaFonts (and
this definition) are perfectly adequate for Knuth's purposes but not
fully descriptive of all of typography. And definitely not conformant to
established usage.

This is not meant to condemn heterodoxy, but just to warn that while the
ASCII markup notations in Knuth's “Second Great Work” [TeX and MetaFont]
are even more widely disseminated than his wonderful coinage of
mathematical notations in “The First Great Work” [The Art of Computer
Programming, volumes I, II, and III], MetaFont has not been accepted as
an encoding for all useful fonts for the future, and the defintions of
font characteristics in MetaFont context must be taken with a large
grain of salt when used with fonts outside the MetaFont font-generation
paradigm.

Knuth's quotation, when applied to a (non-MetaFont) font designer,
overstates the arbitrariness of the design choice; the designer was
stating in the old days that you'd need a saw, a file, or a caster with
his matrices if you wanted to use negative leading to set his type
closer than he wanted to see it set; and today, in Photo/digital
composition, the designer is either indicating the opinion of the
original metal-head or his own design advice as to what the minimum
distance between adjacent baselines should be.

Also, point size is very poor predictor of blending, except in a
mechanical sense in terms of not-overflowing the same rectangles. Some
faces to blend _in the same line_ with 12 point type will need to be
10/12 or 14/12, due to differences in the way they fill the space. (The
overall leading should fit the body type.) Harmony and contrast of
overall color, shape, style, etc. are much more important considerations
for blending than body-size. (For two types to work together, there must
be sufficient harmonies between them to work together and sufficent
contrasts to be easily distinguished. See Carl Dair's books.)

If one wants to understand usage of typographical terms in the general
milieu, the _Chicago Manual of Style_'s appendix on Typesetting for
Authors is a good capsule presentation of history and terminology; if
one wants the nitty-gritty on how digital type does, or at least should,
differ and be treated differently from just copies of metal, see Richard
Rubinstein, _Digital Typography_, MIT Press. On type in general, consult
D.B. Updike in a library (out of print), or A(lexander) S. Lawson (who
covers electronic type in his latest revision!).

== Where can I get fonts?

There are a number of free font archives on the net. In addition, a
number of commercial foundries can now sell you fonts directly over the
net.

=== Free and Shareware Fonts

The sites below are places where shareware and free fonts are available.
Note that most typefaces are not available in shareware form and many
shareware faces are less than adequate for a variety of reasons,
particularly at small sizes. It seems to be the consensus of the
comp.fonts community that “you get what you pay for.”

Note also that a number of the fonts in these archives are of dubious
origin. It's fairly easy to take a commercial font, run it through a
font editor of some sort, and produce a font which bears no notice of
it's origin. That's piracy. Caveat downloader.

Adobe Type 1 Fonts in MS-DOS/Unix Format::

ftp://ftp.cica.indiana.edu/pub/pc/win3/fonts
ftp://ftp.cica.indiana.edu/pub/pc/win3/fonts/atm
ftp://archive.umich.edu/msdos/mswindows/fonts

Adobe Type 1 Fonts in Mac Format::

ftp://mac.archive.umich.edu/mac/system.extensions/font/type1
ftp://sumex-aim.stanford.edu:/info-mac/font

Adobe Type 3 Fonts in Mac Format::

ftp://mac.archive.umich.edu/mac/system.extensions/font/type3

TrueType fonts in MS-DOS Format::

ftp://ftp.cica.indiana.edu/pub/pc/win3/fonts/truetype

TrueType fonts in Mac Format::

ftp://mac.archive.umich.edu/mac/system.extensions/font/truetype

==== TeX (MetaFont) fonts:

Try the fonts directory at the WWW Interface to the
Comprehensive TeX Archive Network.

The TeX community has its own support groups that can provide better
answers to this question. The canonical list of MetaFont fonts is posted
occasionally to comp.text.tex. The comp.text.tex newsgroup (or the
Info-TeX mailing list, `info-tex@shsu.edu` are good places to start.

==== Other Sources

Font CDs and CD archives of large internet sites are generally
inexpensive and offer quick access to hundreds and sometimes thousands
of fonts. Note, however, that the same comments about quality and
dubious origin sometimes apply.

=== Commercial Fonts

In general, there are no legal free sources of commercial faces
(Helvetica, Times Roman, Courier, Palatino, Century Schoolbook, etc.).
However, some vendors have made selected faces freely available.

See ? for a list of font vendors. Some of these vendors (Bitstream and
Monotype, for example) sell fonts directly over the net.

=== Where can I get fonts for non-Roman alphabets?

As mentioned above, the list of font vendors is annotated with
information about non-Roman alphabets. Commercially, Masumi suggests
that Linguists' Software is the current [ed: as of 7/92] leading
supplier of non-Roman fonts.

Ian Tresman contributes:

The Multilingual PC Directory is a source guide to multilingual and
foreign language software, including fonts, for PCs. Over a hundred
different languages are included, from Arabic to Hieroglyphics to Zulu.
A 1200 word description is available from the publishers, Knowledge
Computing, email: `72240.3447@compuserve.com`.

=== What about fonts with the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) symbols?

I summarized Scott Brumage's recent post for the FAQ:

=== Shareware or free (PostScript Type 1 and/or TrueType):

TechPhon::
  Seems to lack some characters and has no zero-offset characters (for
  accents).
PalPhon::
  A phonetic font which you can get by anonymous ftp from
  `mac.archive.umich.edu`. It is called PalPhon. There are actually two
  fonts: the basic PalPhon and one with additional accents and symbols
  called PalPi. The package includes some documents on using the fonts
  as well.
SIL-IPA::
  SIL-IPA is a set of scalable IPA fonts containing the full
  International Phonetic Alphabet with 1990 Kiel revisions. Three
  typefaces are included:
  +
  SIL Doulos (similar to Times)
  +
  SIL Sophia (similar to Helvetica)
  +
  SIL Manuscript (monowidth)
  +
  Each font contains all the standard IPA discrete characters and
  non-spacing diacritics as well as some suprasegmental and puncuation
  marks. Each font comes in both PostScript Type 1 and TrueType formats.
  The fonts are also available for Microsoft Windows.
  +
  These fonts were designed by the Printing Arts Department of the
  Summer Institute of Linguistics, Dallas, Texas.

=== Shareware or free (TeX):

METAFONT sources of the phonetic symbols developed by
Tokyo-Shoseki-Printing and Sanseido are available. The font contains all
of IPA (Internatioanl Phonetic Alphabet) symbols.

You can get phonetic symbols METAFONT (named TSIPA) from

`ftp.foretune.co.jp:/pub/tools/TeX/Fonts`

The IP address for `ftp.foretune.co.jp` is 133.123.1.2.

=== Commercial:

Linguist's Software Adobe (ITC Stone Phonetic [#255], Times Phonetic
[#278])

== How can I convert my ... font to ... format?

Conversion from one bitmapped format to another is not generally too
difficult. Conversion from one scalable format to another is very
difficult. Several commercial software packages claim to perform these
tasks, but none has been favorably reviewed by the comp.fonts community.

=== Converting Between TrueType and Adobe Type 1 Formats

This section was constructed from postings by Primoz Peterlin and Bert
Medley in Sep 1993.

There are several commercial tools that will convert between these
formats. There are no shareware or free tools that will do the job. See
also “Why do converted fonts look so bad?”.

==== FontMonger by Ares Software

Performs conversion between Adobe Type 1, Adobe Type 3 and TrueType
formats in both PC-DOS and Mac flavours, as well as simple glyph
editing. Currently at version 1.0.7, patches available via CompuServe.
Available for Mac and MS Windows. Commercial product, price $60-80.

==== Alltype by Atech Software

Performs font conversion. A stable product, being on a market for a
while. Available for PC-DOS/MS Windows only. Commercial product. Atech
is supposedly leaving the business.

==== Fontographer by Altsys Co.

Comprehensive package, allowing creation of fonts as well as conversion
between formats. Available for Mac and MS Windows. Commercial product,
price cca. $270 (PC version).

==== Metamorphosis by Altsys Co.

Available for Mac. Commercial product. More info needed.

=== Converting Between Other Scalable Formats

Many of the programs in the preceding section claim to be able to
convert between other formats as well. And there are probably other
commercial programs as well. However, as several people have noted,
conversion from one scalable format to another is a bad idea. If the
original font was well hinted, the converted font will not be. Of
course, if the original was poorly hinted, maybe it won't matter much.

In an effort to settle a long-running and oft-asked question, I'll be
blunt: as of today [6/93], THERE ARE NO NON-COMMERCIAL PROGRAMS WHICH
WILL CONVERT FROM ONE SCALABLE FORMAT TO ANOTHER. Not from TrueType to
PostScript Type 1, Type 3, Type 5, or any other scalable PostScript
format. Not from PostScript Type 1 to TrueType. Not to or from
Intellifont. Not to or from Sun F3 format.

For specific conversions, check the platform specific parts of the FAQ.
Most of the conversions discussed require platform specific tools.

Here is a summary of the conversions discussed (and the section in which
they appear):

Mac Type 1 PostScript::
  To PC Type 1 PostScript (MS-DOS). To TrueType (commercial).
PC Type 1 PostScript::
  To Mac Type 1 PostScript (Mac, commercial). To TrueType (commercial).
  To @TeX\{} `PK` (MS-DOS).
TrueType::
  To Type 1 PostScript (Mac and MS-DOS, commercial). To HP LaserJet
  bitmaps (MS-DOS, hack!).
TeX `PK`::
  To HP LaserJet bitmap softfonts (MS-DOS).
HP LaserJet bitmap softfonts::
  To TeX `PK` (MS-DOS).

In addition, Adobe ships a copy of Adobe Font Foundry with all of its
fonts which can convert Type 1 fonts into HP LaserJet softfonts.

=== Why Do Converted Fonts Look So Bad?

This section was constructed from postings by Mark Hastings and David
Glenn in Aug 1993.

With all commercially available conversion tools, converting fonts
between scalable formats almost always results in a font inferior to the
original. (The rare case where a converted font is not inferior to the
original occurs _only_ when the original is a cheap knock-off, and the
automatic hinting of the conversion program is better than automatic
hinting used in the original!)

David Glenn contributes the following analysis:

There are a few probable [reasons why converted fonts, especially screen
fonts, look inferior to the original]. First off, any font that's
converted uses a converting algorithm which will make an exact copy at
best. Because no currently available converter even comes close to
copying faithfully the manual tweaks and hinting in a font file, you
often end up with poor screen fonts and poor output. The only reason
that printed output from the converted font looks markedly better than
the screen font is that the printed output is at a higher resolution.
The converter achieves better results on the higher resolutions because
hinting is less important at higher resolutions. Screen fonts are
incredibly complex to make well. You have very few pixels to represent a
very aesthetic and distinct design. That's why at small sizes almost all
typefaces look alike—how do you represent a graceful concave side on
the letter “L” for Optima with only 12 pixels in height and one in
width? You can't. And that's why most fonts look similar at 10pt, unless
they're hand hinted by typograhers.

One thing that may come into play when fonts are converted between
platforms, for example between PC/Windows format and Mac format, is that
fonts are hinted down to a certain number of pixels per em. On a Mac
screen (72 dpi) there is a one-to-one correspondence between the ppem
and the point size of a font. Under windows, the usual VGA screen is
96dpi and fonts that look good at 8 or 9 pt under windows might look
like crap on a Mac 'cuz the fonts weren't hinted below 10 or 11ppem.
Also, the conversion programs may have made the appearance worse at some
sizes than others.

Whenever you convert fonts from one platform to the other keep in mind
that:

* Your license with the type foundry may or may not allow this.
* The font may or may not have the correct character sets in it.
* The TT font file may or may not have all the tables necessary.
* Your converter may make it so ugly that you don't want to use it...

=== Smoothing Bitmaps

This section was constructed from postings by Jason Lee Weiler and
Piercarlo Antonio Grandi

Enlarging bitmapped images is easy, but enlarging them without creating
very jagged edges is much more demanding. There are several
possibilities.

* If you are interested in programming your own solution, the
comp.graphics FAQ will provide pointers to a number of resources that
can get you started.
* If the bitmaps are in a standard format, the 'xv' tool (an X11 picture
viewing tool) includes magnify and smooth functions that may perform
adequately.
* Commercial tools like Adobe Illustrator, Corel Draw, and many others
include tracing functions that can translate some bitmaps into
acceptable outlines (which can be enlarged without jaggedness).
* The GNU Font Utilities include a tracing tool that may be helpful.

== Are fonts copyrightable?

This topic is hotly debated at regular intervals on comp.fonts. Terry
Carroll. provides the following analysis of current [ed: as of 6/92]
legislation and regulation regarding fonts and copyrights in the United
States. Terry is “Editor in Chief” of Volume 10 of the Santa Clara
Computer and High Technology Law Journal. Members of the comp.fonts
community are encouraged to submit other materials that add clarity to
the issue.

It has been pointed out that this section deals primarily font copyright
issues relevant to the United States and that this situation is not
universal. For example, in many parts of Europe typeface designs are
protectable.

“First, the short answer in the USA: Typefaces are not copyrightable;
bitmapped fonts are not copyrightable, but scalable fonts are
copyrightable. Authorities for these conclusions follow.

Before we get started, let's get some terminology down:

A typeface is a set of letters, numbers, or other symbolic characters,
whose forms are related by repeating design elements consistently
applied in a notational system and are intended to be embodied in
articles whose intrinsic utilitarian function is for use in composing
text or other cognizable combinations of characters.

A font is the computer file or program that is used to represent or
create the typeface.

Now, on to the legal authorities:

Volume 37 of the Code of Federal Regulations specifies this about the
copyrightability of typefaces:

“The following are examples of works not subject to copyright and
applications for registration of such works cannot be entertained: . . .
typeface as typeface” 37 CFR 202.1(e).

The regulation is in accordance with the House of Representatives report
that accompanied the new copyright law, when it was passed in 1976:

“The Committee has considered, but chosen to defer, the possibility of
protecting the design of typefaces. A 'typeface' can be defined as a set
of letters, numbers, or other symbolic characters, whose forms are
related by repeating design elements consistently applied in a
notational system and are intended to be embodied in articles whose
intrinsic utilitarian function is for use in composing text or other
cognizable combinations of characters. The Committee does not regard the
design of typeface, as thus defined, to be a copyrightable 'pictorial,
graphic, or sculptural work' within the meaning of this bill and the
application of the dividing line in section 101.” H. R. Rep. No.
94-1476, 94th Congress, 2d Session at 55 (1976), reprinted in 1978 U.S.
Cong. and Admin. News 5659, 5668.

It's also in accordance with the one court case I know of that has
considered the matter: Eltra Corp. V. Ringer, 579 F.2d 294, 208 USPQ 1
(1978, C.A. 4, Va.).

The U.S. Copyright Office holds that a bitmapped font is nothing more
than a computerized representation of a typeface, and as such is not
copyrightable:

“The [September 29, 1988] Policy Decision [published at 53 FR 38110]
based on the [October 10,] 1986 Notice of Inquiry [published at 51 FR
36410] reiterated a number of previous registration decisions made by
the [Copyright] Office. First, under existing law, typeface as such is
not registerable. The Policy Decision then went on to state the Office's
position that 'data that merely represents an electronic depiction of a
particular typeface or individual letterform' [that is, a bitmapped
font] is also not registerable.” 57 FR 6201.

However, scalable fonts are, in the opinion of the Copyright Office,
computer programs, and as such are copyrightable:

“... the Copyright Office is persuaded that creating scalable typefonts
using already-digitized typeface represents a significant change in the
industry since our previous [September 29, 1988] Policy Decision. We are
also persuaded that computer programs designed for generating typeface
in conjunction with low resolution and other printing devices may
involve original computer instructions entitled protection under the
Copyright Act. For example, the creation of scalable font output
programs to produce harmonious fonts consisting of hundreds of
characters typically involves many decisions in drafting the
instructions that drive the printer. The expression of these decisions
is neither limited by the unprotectable shape of the letters nor
functionally mandated. This expression, assuming it meets the usual
standard of authorship, is thus registerable as a computer program.” 57
FR 6202.”

== Typeface Protection

[This article first appeared in TUGboat 7:3 (October 1986), pp. 146-151.
Reproduced with permission.]

=== Preamble

The main question of typeface protection is: “Is there anything there
worth protecting?” To that the answer must certainly be: “Yes.” Typeface
designs are a form of artistic and intellectual property.” To understand
this better, it is helpful to look at who designs type, and what the
task requires.

==== Who makes type designs?

Like other artistic forms, type is created by skilled artisans. They may
be called type designers, lettering artists, punch-cutters,
calligraphers, or related terms, depending on the milieu in which the
designer works and the technology used for making the designs or for
producing the type.

(“Type designer” and “lettering artist” are self-explanatory terms.
“Punch-cutter” refers to the traditional craft of cutting the master
image of a typographic letter at the actual size on a blank of steel
that is then used to make the matrix from which metal type is cast.
Punch-cutting is an obsolete though not quite extinct craft. Seeking a
link to the tradition, modern makers of digital type sometimes use the
anachronistic term “digital punch-cutter”. “Calligrapher” means
literally “one who makes beautiful marks”. The particular marks are
usually hand-written letters, though calligraphers may design type, and
type designers may do calligraphy.)

It usually takes about seven years of study and practice to become a
competent type designer. This seems to be true whether one has a Ph.D.
in computer science, a high-school diploma, or no academic degree. The
skill is acquired through study of the visual forms and practice in
making them. As with geometry, there is no royal road.

The designing of a typeface can require several months to several years.
A family of typefaces of four different styles, say roman, italic, bold
roman, and bold italic, is a major investment of time and effort. Most
type designers work as individuals. A few work in partnership (Times
Roman(R), Helvetica(R), and Lucida(R) were all, in different ways, the
result of design collaboration). In Japan, the large character sets
required for a typeface containing Kanji, Katakana, and Hiragana induce
designers to work in teams of several people.

Although comparisons with other media can only be approximate, a
typeface family is an accomplishment on the order of a novel, a feature
film screenplay, a computer language design and implementation, a major
musical composition, a monumental sculpture, or other artistic or
technical endeavors that consume a year or more of intensive creative
effort. These other creative activities can be protected by copyright or
other forms of intellectual property protection. It is reasonable to
protect typefaces in the same way.

==== The problem of plagiarism

A lack of protection for typeface designs leads to plagiarism, piracy,
and related deplorable activities. They are deplorable because they harm
a broad range of people beyond the original designers of the type.
First, most type plagiarisms are badly done. The plagiarists do not
understand the nature of the designs they are imitating, are unwilling
to spend the necessary time and effort to do good work, and consequently
botch the job. They then try to fob off their junk on unsuspecting users
(authors, editors, and readers). Without copyright, the original
designer cannot require the reproducer of a type to do a good job of
reproduction. Hence, type quality is degraded by unauthorized copying.

Secondly, without protection, designs may be freely imitated; the
plagiarist robs the original designer of financial compensation for the
work. This discourages creative designers from entering and working in
the field. As the needs of typography change (on-line documents and
laser printing are examples of technical and conceptual changes) new
kinds of typefaces are required. Creative design in response to such
needs cannot flourish without some kind of encouragement for the
creators. In a capitalist society, the common method is property rights
and profit. In a socialist (or, in the past, royalist) society, the
state itself might employ type artists. France, as a monarchy and as a
republic, has had occasional state sponsorship of typeface design over
the past 400 years. The Soviet Union has sponsored the design of new
typefaces, not only in the Cyrillic alphabet, but also in the other
exotic scripts used by various national groups in the Soviet Union.

Those who would justify plagiarism often claim that the type artists do
not usually receive a fair share of royalties anyway, since they have
usually sold their designs to some large, exploitive corporation. It is
true that type designers, like many artists, are often exploited by
their “publishers”, but plagiarism exacerbates the problem. Plagiarism
deprives the designer of decent revenues because it diverts profits to
those who merely copied the designs. Plagiarism gives the manufacturer
yet another excuse to reduce the basic royalty or other fee paid for
typeface designs; the theme song is that the market determines the value
of the design and cheap rip-offs debase the value of a face. For those
interested in the economic effects of piracy, it is clear that
plagiarism of type designs ultimately hurts individual artists far more
than it hurts impersonal corporations.

==== Kinds of protection for type

There are five main forms of protection for typefaces: Trademark,
Copyright, Patent, Trade Secret, Ethics

Trademark
+++++++++

A trademark protects the _name_ of a typeface. In the U.S., most
trademarks are registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. The
R in a circle (R) after a trademark or tradename indicates U.S.
registration. The similarly placed TM indicates that a trademark is
claimed, even if not yet officially registered. However, a trademark may
be achieved through use and practice, even without registration. Owners
of trademarks maintain ownership by use of the trademark and by
litigation to prevent infringement or unauthorized use of the trademark
by others.

As a few examples of registered typeface trademarks, there are Times
Roman (U.S. registration 417,439, October 30, 1945 to Eltra Corporation,
now part of Allied); Helvetica (U.S. registration 825,989, March 21,
1967, also to Eltra-Allied), and Lucida (U.S. reg. 1,314,574 to Bigelow
& Holmes). Most countries offer trademark registration and protection,
and it is common for a typeface name to be registered in many countries.
In some cases the registrant may be different than the originator. For
example, The Times New Roman (Times Roman) was originally produced by
the English Monotype Corporation. In England and Europe, most
typographers consider the design to belong to Monotype, but the
trademark was registered by Linotype (Eltra-Allied) in the U.S., as
noted above.

Trademark protection does not protect the design, only the name.
Therefore, a plagiarism of a design is usually christened with a
pseudonym which in some way resembles or suggests the original
trademark, without actually infringing on it. Resemblance without
infringement can be a fine distinction.

Some pseudonyms for Times Roman are: “English Times”, “London”, Press
Roman, “Tms Rmn”. Some for Helvetica are “Helios”, “Geneva”, “Megaron”,
“Triumvirate”. So far, there seem to be none for Lucida. There are
generic typeface classifications used by typographers and type
historians to discuss styles, trends, and categories of design.
Occasionally these apparently innocuous classification systems are
employed by plagiarists to devise generic pseudonyms, such as “Swiss
721” for Helvetica, and “Dutch 801” for Times Roman. It is not certain
whether this usage of a generic classification is more for clarification
or for obfuscation. In general, the proper tradename is a better
indicator of identity, quality, and provenance in typefaces than a
generic name. Some people believe that the same is true for other
commodities such as wine, where taste is important.

A trademark usually consists of both a proprietary and a generic part.
For example, in the name “Lucida Bold Italic”, “Lucida” is the
proprietary trademark part and “Bold Italic” is the generic part. The
generic word “type” is usually understood to be a part of the name, e.g.
“Lucida Bold Italic type”. Sometimes a firm will append its name or a
trademarked abbreviation of it to the typeface name, to achieve a
greater degree of proprietary content, e.g. “B&H Lucida Bold Italic”.

A related matter is the use of the name of a type's designer. A firm
that ethically licenses a typeface will often cite the name of the
designer—e.g. Stanley Morison (with Victor Lardent) for Times Roman,
Max Miedinger (with Edouard Hoffmann) for Helvetica, Charles Bigelow and
Kris Holmes for Lucida. Although a person's name is not usually a
registered trademark, there are common law restrictions on its use. The
marketing of plagiarized type designs generally omits the names of the
designers.

Although Trademark is an incomplete kind of protection, it is used
effectively (within its limitations) to prevent the theft of type names.
Certain traditional typeface names, usually the surnames of illustrious
designers like Garamond, Caslon, Baskerville, Bodoni, and others have
become generic names in the public domain. Trademark protection of such
names requires the addition of some proprietary word(s), as with these
hypothetical creations, “Acme New Garamond”, or “Typoluxe
Meta-Baskerville”.

Copyright
+++++++++

Copyright of typefaces can be divided into two parts: copyright of the
design itself; and copyright of the font in which the design is
implemented. In the U.S., typeface designs are currently not covered by
copyright. This is a result of reluctance by the copyright office to
deal with a complex field; by lobbying against copyright by certain
manufacturers whose profits were based on typeface plagiarism; by a
reluctance of Congress to deal with the complex issues in the recent
revision of the copyright law.

The reluctance of Americans to press for typeface copyright may have
been influenced by a feeling that typeface plagiarism was good for U.S.
high-tech businesses who were inventing new technologies for printing,
and plagiarizing types of foreign origin (Europe and England). If the
situation becomes reversed, and foreign competition (from Japan, Taiwan,
and Korea) threatens to overcome American technological superiority in
the laser printer industry, then American firms may do an about-face and
seek the protection of typeface copyright to help protect the domestic
printer industry. Such a trend may already be seen in the licensing of
typeface trademarks by Adobe, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Imagen, and Xerox in
the U.S. laser printer industry.

In Germany, where typeface design has always been a significant part of
the cultural heritage, and where typefounding has remained an important
business, there are more than one kind of copyright-like protections for
typefaces. Certain long-standing industrial design protection laws have
been used to protect typeface designs in litigation over royalties and
plagiarisms. Further, there is a recent law, the so-called
“Schriftzeichengesetz” enacted in 1981, that specifically protects
typeface designs. New designs are registered, as is done with copyright
in most countries. This law only protects new, original designs. It is
available to non-German designers and firms. Therefore, some type firms
and designers routinely copyright new designs in West Germany. This
gives a degree of protection for products marketed in Germany. Since
multinational corporations may find it cheaper to license a design for
world-wide use rather than deal with a special case in one country, the
German law does encourage licensing on a broader scale than would
initially seem to be the case.

France, like Germany, has ratified an international treaty for
protection of typefaces. This 1973 Vienna treaty will become
international law when four nations ratify it. So far, only France and
West Germany have done so, and thus a design must be protected
separately in each country. Even when the treaty becomes law, it will
take effect only in those countries that have ratified it. The treaty
was principally the work of the late Charles Peignot, a French
typefounder, and John Dreyfus, an English typographer and typographic
scholar. Presently, typefaces may be registered for protection in France
under a 19th century industrial design protection law.

In the U.S., there continues to be some movement for typeface design
protection. A proposed bill that would protect the designs of useful
articles, like type, has been in committee for a few years. It seems to
be going nowhere.

Digital (as opposed to analog) fonts may be protected by copyright of
digital data and of computer programs. It has been established that
computer software is copyrightable. Therefore, software that embodies a
typeface, e.g. a digital font, is presumably also protected. There is
some objection to this kind of copyright, on the grounds that the
ultimate output of the program or the result of the data (i.e. a
typeface design) is not copyrightable. However, the current belief
expressed by the National Commission on New Technological Use of
Copyrighted Works is that software is copyrightable even if its function
is to produce ultimately a non-copyrightable work. Hence, typefaces
produced by Metafont or PostScript(R), two computer languages which
represent fonts as programs, are presumably copyrightable. Typefaces
represented as bit-map data, run-length codes, spline outlines, and
other digital data formats, may also be copyrightable. Some firms do
copyright digital fonts as digital data.

Note that the designs themselves are still not protected in the U.S. A
plagiarist could print out large sized letters (say, one per page) on an
Apple LaserWriter, using a copyrighted PostScript digital font, and then
redigitize those letters by using a scanner or a font digitizing program
and thus produce a new digital font without having copied the _program_
or _digital data_, and thus without infringing the copyright on the
font. The quality of the imitation font would usually be awful, but it
wouldn't violate copyright. Of course, the plagiarist would usually need
to rename the font to evade trademark infringement. [As I write these
words, I have the guilty feeling that I have just provided a recipe for
type rip-off, but others have obviously thought of just such a
scheme–John Dvorak has even proposed something like it in one of his
columns.]

Design Patent
+++++++++++++

The designs of typefaces may be patented in the U.S. under existing
design patent law. Many designs are patented, but type designers
generally don't like the patent process because it is slow, expensive,
and uncertain. Nevertheless, some types do get patented, and it is a
form of potential protection. Note that this is _Design_ Patent–the
typeface doesn't have to be a gizmo that does something, it merely has
to be unlike any previous typeface. The drawback here is that most
attorneys and judges are not aware that there are more than two or three
typefaces: say, handwriting, printing, and maybe blackletter. Therefore,
litigating against infringement is an educational as well as a legal
process. It is easy to see that typeface theft is more subtle than
knocking over a liquor store; it may not be illegal and the returns may
be greater.

Protections like design patent are available in many other countries,
but there is not an international standard (to my knowledge) so the
situation must be examined on a country by country basis.

Invention Patent
++++++++++++++++

Methods of rendering typefaces can be patented as mechanical or
electronic inventions. For example, the old hot-metal Linotype machinery
was protected by various patents, as was the IBM Selectric typewriter
and type ball. IBM neglected to trademark the typeface names like
Courier and Prestige, so once the patents had lapsed, the names
gradually fell into the public domain without IBM doing anything about
it (at the time, and for a dozen years or so, IBM was distracted by a
major U.S. anti-trust suit). Most students of the type protection field
believe that those names are probably unprotectable by now, though IBM
could still presumably make a try for it if sufficiently motivated.

There is currently a noteworthy development regarding a patent for
outline representation of digital type as arcs and vectors, with special
hardware for decoding into rasters. This patent (U.S. 4,029,947, June
14, 1977; reissue 30,679, July 14, 1981) is usually called the Evans &
Caswell patent, after its inventors. It was originally assigned to
Rockwell, and in 1982, Rockwell sued Allied Linotype for infringement.
Allied settled out of court, having paid an amount rumored to be in the
millions. Rockwell sold the patent, along with other typographic
technology, to Information International, Inc. (III), which then sued
Compugraphic for infringement. According to the Seybold Report, a
respected typographic industry journal, Compugraphic recently settled
out of court for 5 million dollars. Although many experts believe the
patent to be invalid because of several prior inventions similar in
concept, it nevertheless seems to be a money-maker in corporate
litigation. The Seybold Report has speculated on which firms III would
litigate against next. Among the candidates suggested by the Seybolds
was Apple for its LaserWriter, which uses outline fonts. Since the
entire laser printer industry and the typesetting industry is moving
toward outline font representation, Apple is certainly not alone. The
Seybolds further speculate on whether the difference between
character-by-character CRT typesetting and raster-scan laser typesetting
and printing would be legally significant in such a case. Ultimately,
some firm will hold out for a court judgement, and the matter will be
decided. %Although the Evans & Caswell patent doesn't have much to do
with %typeface copyright per se, it does make many font vendors nervous.

Trade Secret
++++++++++++

Given that typeface designs have relatively little copyright protection
in the U.S., they are often handled as trade secrets. The secret must
apply to the digital data or programs only, because the images
themselves are ultimately revealed to the public as printed forms. It is
much more difficult to reconstruct the formula of Coca-Cola from its
taste than it is to reconstruct the design of Helvetica from its look on
the page. The exact bitmap or spline outline of a digital font is
usually not reconstructable from the printed image, although CRT screen
fonts at usual resolutions (60--120 dots per inch) may be reconstructed
by patient counting and mapping of bits off a screen display. Typeface
licenses often contain stipulations that the digital data will be
encrypted and confidential. Just as a firm will protect the secret of a
soft drink recipe, so a type firm will protect the exact nature of its
digital data.

Ethics
++++++

Some typographers are motivated by higher principles than greed, profit,
expediency, and personal interest. Idealists afflicted with concepts of
ethical behavior and a vision of typography as a noble art may find it
distasteful to use plagiarized types. Some graphic designers insist on
using typefaces with bona-fide trademarks, both to ensure that the type
will be of high quality, and to encourage creativity and ethics in the
profession. A consequence of plagiarism that is sometimes overlooked is
a general erosion of ethics in an industry. If it is okay to steal
typeface designs, then it may be okay to purloin other kinds of data, to
falsify one's resume, to misrepresent a product, and so forth. Most
professional design organizations attempt to promote ethical standards
of professional behavior, and personal standards may extend to avoidance
of plagiarism.

The Association Typographique Internationale (ATypI) is an international
organization of type designers, type manufacturers, and letterform
educators. Its purpose is to promote ethical behavior in the industry,
advancement of typographic education, communication among designers, and
other lofty aims. Members of ATypI agree to abide by a moral code that
restricts plagiarism and other forms of depraved behavior (pertaining to
typography). These are noble goals, but some members (especially
corporate members) of ATypI, confronted with the pressures and
opportunities of commercial reality, nevertheless plagiarize typefaces
of fellow members, the moral code notwithstanding. Since ATypI is a
voluntary organization, there is very little that can be done about most
such plagiarism. Some years back, a world-famous type designer resigned
%the noted type designer Hermann Zapf from the ATypI Board of Directors
in protest over the organization's flaccid attitude toward plagiarists
among its ranks. He has since agreed to sit on the board again, but
criticism of the organization's inability to prevent type rip-offs by
its own members, not to mention by non-members, continues to be heard.
Moderates in ATypI believe that a few morals are better than none. It is
not clear whether their philosophical stance derives from Plato, Hobbes,
or Rousseau.

Given the general attitude of users toward copyrighted video and
software, it is doubtful that ethical considerations will hinder most
end-users' attitude to plagiarized type fonts. A desire to have the
fashionable “label” or trademark may be a greater motivation toward the
use of bona-fide fonts than an ethical consideration.

==== Further reading

“The State of the Art in Typeface Design Protection”, Edward Gottschall,
_Visible Language_, Vol. XIX, No. 1, 1985 (a special issue on “The
Computer and the Hand in Type Design”–proceedings of a conference held
at Stanford University in August, 1983).

_Der Schutz Typographischer Schriftzeichen_, by Guenter Kelbel. Carl
Heymans Verlag KG, Cologne, 1984. (A learned account, in juridical
German prose, of the significance of the Vienna Treaty of 1973 and the
West German Schriftzeichengesetz of 1981.)

==== Disclaimer

These notes were originally prepared at the request of Brian Reid, for
informal distribution. They are based on the author's review of
available literature on the subject of typeface protection, and on
personal experience in registering types for trademark, copyright, and
patent. However, they are %While they result from careful research, no
claim is made for accuracy; not legal advice. If one is contemplating
protecting or plagiarizing a typeface, and seeks legal opinion, it is
advisable to consult an attorney. The term “plagiarize” (and words
derived from it) is used here in its dictionary sense of “to take and
use as one's own the ideas of another” and does not mean that the
practice of typeface plagiarism is illegal, as that is determined by the
laws of a particular country.

The author is a professor of digital typography as well as a
professional designer of original digital typefaces for electronic
printers and computer workstations. He therefore has an obvious bias
toward the inculcation of ethical standards and the legal protection of
artistic property. Other commentators might have a different
perspective.

== File Formats

Many different kinds of files are available on the net. These files
contain many different kinds of data for many different architectures.
Frequently, the extension (trailing end) of a filename gives a good clue
as to the format of its contents and the architecture that it was
created on.

In order to save space, most files on the net are compressed in one way
or another. Many compression/decompression programs exist on multiple
architectures.

Multiple files and directories are often combined into a single
`archive' file. Many archive formats perform compression automatically.

=== File Format Extensions

`.tar`::
  Unix `tape archive' format. Tar files can contain multiple files and
  directories. Unlike most archiving programs, tar files are held
  together in a wrapper but are not automatically compressed by tar.
`.Z`::
  Unix `compress' format. Compression doesn't form a wrapper around
  multiple files, it simply compresses a single file. As a result, you
  will frequently see files with the extension .tar.Z. This implies that
  the files are compressed tar archives.
`.z`; `.gz`::
  GNU zip format. GNU zip doesn't form a wrapper around multiple files,
  it simply compresses a single file. As a result, you will frequently
  see files with the extension .tar.z or .tar.gz. This implies that the
  files are compressed tar archives. Do not confuse GNU Zip and PKZip or
  GNU Zip and Unix compress, those are three different programs!
`.hqx`::
  Macintosh `BinHex' format. In order to reliably transfer Mac files
  from one architecture to another, they are BinHex encoded. This is
  actually an ascii file containing mostly hexadecimal digits. It is
  neither a compression program nor an archive format.
`.sit`::
  Macintosh `Stuffit' archive.
`.cpt`::
  Macintosh `Compactor' archive.
  +
  Like the .tar.Z format that is common among Unix archives, Macintosh
  archives frequently have the extensions .sit.hqx or .cpt.hqx
  indicating a BinHex'ed archive.
`.arc`::
  PC `arc' archive. This is an older standard (in PC terms, at least)
  and has gone out of fashion.
`.zip`::
  PC `zip' archive. This is the most common PC archive format today.
`.arj`::
  PC `arj' archive.
`.zoo`::
  PC `zoo' archive
`.lzh`::
  PC `lha/lharc' archive.
`.uue`::
  `UUencoding' format. In order to reliably transfer binary data across
  architectures (or through email), they are frequently uuencoded. This
  is actually an ascii file. It is neither a compression program nor an
  archive format.

=== Font Formats

Just as the are many, many archive formats, there are many different
font formats. The characteristics of some of these formats are discussed
below. Once again, the file extension may help you to determine the font
type. (On the Mac, the resource TYPE field is (probably) a better
indicator).

PostScript Type 1 Fonts:::
  Postscript Type 1 fonts (Also called ATM (Adobe Type Manager) fonts,
  Type 1, and outline fonts) contains information, in outline form, that
  allows a postscript printer, or ATM to generate fonts of any size.
  Most also contain hinting information which allows fonts to be
  rendered more readable at lower resolutions and small type sizes.
PostScript Type 3 Fonts:::
  Postscript type 3 fonts are an old outline font format that is not
  compatible with ATM. Most developers have stopped using this format
  except in a few special cases, where special type 3 characteristics
  (pattern fills inside outlines, for example) have been used.
TrueType Fonts:::
  Truetype fonts are a new font format developed by Microsoft with
  Apple. The rendering engine for this font is built into system 7 and
  an init, the Truetype init, is available for system 6 (freeware from
  Apple). It is also built into MS Windows v3.1. Like PostScript Type 1
  and Type 3 fonts, it is also an outline font format that allows both
  the screen, and printers, to scale fonts to display them in any size.
Bitmap Fonts:::
  Bitmap fonts contain bitmaps of fonts in them. This a picture of the
  font at a specific size that has been optimized to look good at that
  size. It cannot be scaled bigger without making it look horrendously
  ugly. On the Macintosh, bitmap fonts also contain the kerning
  information for a font and must be installed with both type 1 and type
  3 fonts. Their presence also speeds the display of commonly used font
  sizes.

=== Font Format Extensions

`.afm`::
  Adobe Type 1 metric information in `ascii' format (human parsable)
`.bco`::
  Bitstream compressed outline
`.bdf`::
  Adobe's Bitmap Distribution Format. This format can be converted to
  the platform specific binary files required by the local X Windows
  server. This is a bitmap font format distributed in ASCII.
`.bez`::
  Bezier outline information
`.cfn`::
  Calamus Font Notation. Vector font format, without hinting, but with
  greater accuracy when compared to Type 1 fonts. Used by a.o. Calamus
  (Atari, Windows NT), a DTP program with Soft RIP.
`.chr`::
  Borland stroked font file
`.ff, .f3b, .fb`::
  Sun formats. More info when I know more...
`.fli`::
  Font libraries produced by emTeX fontlib program. Used by emTeX
  drivers and newer versions of dvips.
`.fnt`::
  Bitmapped GEM font in either Motorola or Intel format.
`.fon`::
  An MS-Windows bitmapped font.
`.fot`::
  An MS-Windows kludge for TrueType fonts. The `fot` file points to the
  actual TrueType font (in a `ttf` file).
`.gf`::
  Generic font (the output of TeX's MetaFont program (possibly others?))
`.mf`::
  TeX MetaFont font file (text file of MetaFont commands)
`.pfa`::
  Adobe Type 1 Postscript font in ASCII format (PC/Unix) I believe that
  this format is suitable for directly downloading to your PostScript
  printer (someone correct me if I'm wrong ;-)
`.pfb`::
  Adobe Type 1 PostScript font in “binary`' format (PC/Unix) Note: this
  format is not suitable for downloading directly to your PostScript
  printer. There are utilities for conversion between PFB and PFA (see
  the utilities section of the FAQ).
`.pfm`::
  Printer font metric information in Windows format
`.pk`::
  TeX packed bitmap font file (also seen as .###pk where ### is a
  number)
`.pl`::
  TeX `property list' file (a human readable version of .tfm)
`.ps`::
  Frequently, any PostScript file. With respect to fonts, probably a
  Type3 font. This designation is much less `standard' than the others.
  Other non-standard extensions are .pso, .fon, and .psf (they are a
  mixture of type 1 and type 3 fonts).
`.pxl`::
  TeX pixel bitmap font file (obsolete, replaced by .pk)
`.sfl`::
  LaserJet bitmapped softfont, landscape orientation
`.sfp`::
  LaserJet bitmapped softfont, portrait orientation
`.sfs`::
  LaserJet scalable softfont
`.spd`::
  Vector font in Speedo format.
`.tdf`::
  Vector font type definitions for Speedo fonts.
`.tfm`::
  TeX font metric file. Also an HP Tagged Font Metric file.
`.ttf`::
  An MS-Windows TrueType font.
`.vf`::
  TeX virtual font which allows building of composite fonts (a character
  can be composed of any sequence of movements, characters (possibly
  from multiple fonts) rules and TeX specials)
`.vpl`::
  TeX `property list' (human readable) format of a `.vf`

== Ligatures

A ligature occurs where two or more letterforms are written or printed
as a unit. Generally, ligatures replace characters that occur next to
each other when they share common components. Ligatures are a subset of
a more general class of figures called “contextual forms.” Contextual
forms describe the case where the particular shape of a letter depends
on its context (surrounding letters, whether or not it's at the end of a
line, etc.).

One of the most common ligatures is “fi”. Since the dot above a
lowercase 'I' interferes with the loop on the lowercase 'F', when 'f'
and 'i' are printed next to each other, they are combined into a single
figure with the dot absorbed into the 'f'.

An example of a more general contextual form is the greek lowercase
sigma. When typesetting greek, the selection of which 'sigma' to use is
determined by whether or not the letter occurs at the end of the word
(i.e., the final position in the word).

Amanda Walker provides the following discussion of ligatures:

Ligatures were originally used by medieval scribes to conserve space and
increase writing speed. A 14th century manuscript, for example, will
include hundreds of ligatures (this is also where “accents” came from).
Early typefaces used ligatures in order to emulate the appearance of
hand-lettered manuscripts. As typesetting became more automated, most of
these ligatures fell out of common use. It is only recently that
computer based typesetting has encouraged people to start using them
again (although 'fine art' printers have used them all along).
Generally, ligatures work best in typefaces which are derived from
calligraphic letterforms. Also useful are contextual forms, such as
swash capitals, terminal characters, and so on.

A good example of a computer typeface with a rich set of ligatures is
Adobe Caslon (including Adobe Caslon Expert). It includes:

Upper case, lower case, small caps, lining numerals, oldstyle numerals,
vulgar fractions, superior and inferior numerals, swash italic caps,
ornaments, long s, and the following ligatures:

ff fi fl ffi ffl Rp ct st Sh Si Sl SS St (where S=long s)

[Ed: Another common example is the Computer Modern Roman typeface that
is provided with TeX. this family of fonts include the ff, fi, fl, ffi,
and ffl ligatures which TeX automatically uses when it finds these
letters juxtaposed in the text.]

While there are a large number number of possible ligatures, generally
only the most common ones are actually provided. In part, this is
because the presence of too many alternate forms starts reducing
legibility. A case in point is Luxeuil Miniscule, a highly-ligatured
medieval document hand which is completely illegible to the untrained
eye (and none too legible to the trained eye, either :)).

Don Hosek offers the following insight into ligatures:

Ligatures were used in lead type, originally in imitation of
calligraphic actions (particularly in Greek which retained an excessive
number of ligatures in printed material as late as the 19th century),
but as typefaces developed, ligatures were retained to improve the
appearance of certain letter combinations. In some cases, it was used to
allow certain letter combinations to be more closely spaced (e.g., “To”
or “Vo”) and were referred to as “logotypes”. In other cases, the
designs of two letters were merged to keep the overall spacing of words
uniform. Ligatures are provided in most contemporary fonts for exactly
this reason.

Liam Quin makes the following observations:

The term ligature should only be used to describe joined letters in
printing, not letters that overlap in manuscripts.

Many (not all) accents came from the practice of using a tilde or other
mark to represent an omitted letter, so that for example the Latin word
`Dominus' would be written dns, with a tilde or bar over the n. This is
an abbreviation, not a ligature.

Most ligatures vanished during the 15th and 16th Centuries. It was
simply too much work to use them, and it increased the price of book
production too much.

[Ed: there is no “complete” set of ligatures.]

== Built-in Fonts

PostScript printers (and Adobe Type Manager) with 13 fonts have:

Courier, Courier-Bold, Courier-BoldOblique, Courier-Oblique, Helvetica,
Helvetica-Bold, Helvetica-BoldOblique, Helvetica-Oblique, Symbol,
Times-Bold, Times-BoldItalic, Times-Italic, Times-Roman

Postscript printers with 17 fonts have:

Courier, Courier-Bold, Courier-BoldOblique, Courier-Oblique, Helvetica,
Helvetica-Bold, Helvetica-BoldOblique, Helvetica-Narrow,
Helvetica-Narrow-Bold, Helvetica-Narrow-BoldOblique,
Helvetica-Narrow-Oblique, Helvetica-Oblique, Symbol, Times-Bold,
Times-BoldItalic, Times-Italic, Times-Roman

Postscript printers with 35 fonts have:

All of the above, plus the following:

ZapfChancery-MediumItalic, ZapfDingbats, AvantGarde-Book,
AvantGarde-BookOblique, AvantGarde-Demi, AvantGarde-DemiOblique,
Bookman-Demi, Bookman-DemiItalic, Bookman-Light, Bookman-LightItalic,
NewCenturySchlbk-Bold, NewCenturySchlbk-BoldItalic,
NewCenturySchlbk-Italic, NewCenturySchlbk-Roman, Palatino-Bold,
Palatino-BoldItalic, Palatino-Italic, Palatino-Roman

HP LaserJet printers (II, IIP)

Courier 10, Courier 12, LinePrinter 16.66, ...

HP LaserJet printers (III, IIIP)

All of the above, plus the following:

Scalable Times Roman and Scalable Univers using Compugraphic's
Intellifont hinted font format.

HP LaserJet IV printers

All of the above, plus the following scalable (Intellifont) faces:

Courier, Courier Bold, Courier Italic, Courier Bold Italic, CG Times, CG
Times Bold, CG Times Italic, CG Times Bold Italic CG Omega, CG Omega
Bold, CG Omega Italic, CG Omega Bold Italic Coronet, Clarendon Condensed
Univers Medium, Univers Bold, Univers Medium Italic, Univers Bold Italic
Univers Medium Condensed, Univers Bold Condensed, Univers Medium
Condensed Italic, Univers Bold Condensed Italic Antique Olive, Antique
Olive Bold, Antique Olive Italic Garamond Antiqua, Garamond Halbfett,
Garamond Kursiv, Garamond Kursiv Halbfett Marigold, Albertus Medium,
Albertus Extra Bold Arial, Arial Bold, Arial Italic, Arial Bold Italic
Times New, Times New Bold, Times New Italic, Times New Bold Italic
Symbol, Wingdings, Letter Gothic, Letter Gothic Bold, Letter Gothic
Italic

SPARCPrinters

The basic 35 fonts plus four scaled faces of each of Bembo, Gill Sans,
Rockwell, Lucida, Lucida Bright, Sans and Typewriter, giving a total of
57 fonts, all in the F3 format.

== Glossary

[ I ripped this right out of the manual I wrote for Sfware. If you have
comments, improvements, suggestions, please tell me... ]

anti-aliasing::
  [ed: this is an 'off-the-cuff' definition, feel free to clarify it for
  me ;-) ]
  +
  On low-resolution bitmap devices (where ragged, ugly characters are
  the norm) which support more than two colors, it is possible to
  provide the appearance of higher resolution with anti-aliasing.
  Anti-aliasing uses shaded pixels around the edges of the bitmap to
  give the appearance of partial-pixels which improves the apparent
  resolution.
baseline::
  The baseline is an imaginary line upon which each character rests.
  Characters that appear next to each other are (usually) lined up so
  that their baselines are on the same level. Some characters extend
  below the baseline (“g” and “j”, for example) but most rest on it.
bitmap::
  A bitmap is an array of dots. If you imagine a sheet of graph paper
  with some squares colored in, a bitmap is a compact way of
  representing to the computer which squares are colored and which are
  not.
  +
  In a bitmapped font, every character is represented as a pattern of
  dots in a bitmap. The dots are so small (300 or more dots-per-inch,
  usually) that they are indistinguishable on the printed page.
character::
  \(1) The smallest component of written language that has semantic
  value. Character refers to the abstract idea, rather than a specific
  shape (see also glyph), though in code tables some form of visual
  representation is essential for the reader's understanding. (2) The
  basic unit of encoding for the Unicode character encoding, 16 bits of
  information. (3) Synonym for “code element”. (4) The English name for
  the ideographic written elements of Chinese origin.
download::
  Downloading is the process of transferring information from one device
  to another. This transferral is called downloading when the transfer
  flows from a device of (relatively) more power to one of (relatively)
  less power. Sending new fonts to your printer so that it “learns” how
  to print characters in that font is called downloading.
font::
  A particular collection of characters of a typeface with unique
  parameters in the 'Variation vector', a particular instance of values
  for orientation, size, posture, weight, etc., values. The word font or
  fount is derived from the word foundry, where, originally, type was
  cast. It has come to mean the vehicle which holds the typeface
  character collection. A font can be metal, photographic film, or
  electronic media (cartridge, tape, disk).
glyph::
  \(1) The actual shape (bit pattern, outline) of a character image. For
  example, an italic 'a' and a roman 'a' are two different glyphs
  representing the same underlying character. In this strict sense, any
  two images which differ in shape constitute different glyphs. In this
  usage, “glyph” is a synonym for “character image”, or simply “image”.
  (2) A kind of idealized surface form derived from some combination of
  underlying characters in some specific context, rather than an actual
  character image. In this broad usage, two images would constitute the
  same glyph whenever they have essentially the same topology (as in
  oblique 'a' and roman 'a'), but different glyphs when one is written
  with a hooked top and the other without (the way one prints an 'a' by
  hand). In this usage, “glyph” is a synonym for “glyph type,” where
  glyph is defined as in sense 1.
hints::
  When a character is described in outline format the outline has
  unlimited resolution. If you make it ten times as big, it is just as
  accurate as if it were ten times as small.
  +
  However, to be of use, we must transfer the character outline to a
  sheet of paper through a device called a raster image processor (RIP).
  The RIP builds the image of the character out of lots of little
  squares called picture elements (pixels).
  +
  The problem is, a pixel has physical size and can be printed only as
  either black or white. Look at a sheet of graph paper. Rows and
  columns of little squares (think: pixels). Draw a large `O' in the
  middle of the graph paper. Darken in all the squares touched by the O.
  Do the darkened squares form a letter that looks like the O you drew?
  This is the problem with low resolution (300 dpi). Which pixels do you
  turn on and which do you leave off to most accurately reproduce the
  character?
  +
  All methods of hinting strive to fit (map) the outline of a character
  onto the pixel grid and produce the most pleasing/recognizable
  character no matter how coarse the grid is.
kerning::
  (noun): That portion of a letter which extends beyond its width, that
  is, the letter shapes that overhang - the projection of a character
  beyond its sidebearings.
  +
  (verb): To adjust the intercharacter spacing in character groups
  (words) to improve their appearance. Some letter combinations (“AV”
  and “To”, for example) appear farther apart than others because of the
  shapes of the individual letters.
  +
  Many sophisticated word processors move these letter combinations
  closer together automatically.
outline font/format::
  See 'scalable font'
point::
  The (more or less) original point system (Didot) did have exactly 72
  points to the inch. The catch is that it was the French imperial inch,
  somewhat longer than the English inch, and it went away in the French
  revolution. What most people now think of as points were established
  by the United States Typefounders Association in 1886. This measure
  was a matter of convenience for the members of the Association, who
  didn't want to retool any more than they had to, so it had no
  relationship to the inch. By that date, people realized that the inch
  was an archaic measure anyway; the point was set to be 1/12 of a pica,
  and an 83-pica distance was made equal to 35 centimeters. (Talk about
  arbitrary!)
  +
  Thus the measure of 72.27/in. is just an approximation. Of course,
  when PostScript was being written, it was necessary to fit into an
  inch-measured world. For the sake of simplicity PostScript defined a
  point as exactly 1/72". With the prevalance of DTP, the simplified
  point has replaced the older American point in many uses. Personally,
  I don't see that it matters one way or the other; all that counts is
  that there's a commonly-understood unit of measurement that allows you
  to get the size you think you want. That is, after all, the point ;)
scalable font::
  A scalable font, unlike a bitmapped font, is defined mathematically
  and can be rendered at any requested size (within reason).
softfont::
  A softfont is a bitmapped or scalable description of a typeface or
  font. They can be downloaded to your printer and used just like any
  other printer font. Unlike built-in and cartridge fonts, softfonts use
  memory inside your printer. Downloading a lot of softfonts may reduce
  the printers ability to construct complex pages.
symbol set::
  The symbol set of a font describes the relative positions of
  individual characters within the font. Since there can only be 256
  characters in most fonts, and there are well over 256 different
  characters used in professional document preparation, there needs to
  be some way to map characters into positions within the font. The
  symbol set serves this purpose. It identifies the “map” used to
  position characters within the font.
typeface::
  The features by which a character's design is recognized, hence the
  word face. Within the Latin language group of graphic shapes are the
  following forms: Uncial, Blackletter, Serif, Sans Serif, Scripts, and
  Decorative. Each form characterizes one or more designs. Example:
  Serif form contains four designs called Old Style, Transitional,
  Modern, and Slab Serif designs. The typeface called Bodoni is a Modern
  design, while Times Roman is a Transitional design.

== Bibliography

Editors note: the following books have been suggested by readers of
comp.fonts. They are listed in no particular order. I have lost the
citations for some of the submissions. If you wrote a review that
appears below and you aren't credited, please let norm know.

I have decided that this is the best section for pointers to other font
resources (specs and other documents, for example). These appear after
the traditional bibliographic entries. As usual I will happily accept
entries for this section. As of 9/92, the only files listed are the
TrueType font information files available from Microsoft.

Bill Ricker contributed the following general notes:

The Watson-Guptill, Godine, and Dover publishers all have many
typography titles. Godine and Dover tend to be excellent; W-G tends
toward 'how-to' books which are good for basics and juried Annuals of
job work.

_Hermann Zapf and his Design Philosophy_, Society of Typographic Arts,
Chicago, 1987.

On Stone—The Art and Use of Typography on the Personal Computer,
Sumner Stone, Bedford Arts, 1991.

_Of the Just Shaping of Letters_, Albrecht Durer, isbn 0-486-21306-4.

First published in 1525 as part of his theoretical treatise on applied
geometry, “The Art of Measurment”.

_Champ Flevry_, Geofroy Troy.

First published in 1529 Troy attempts, in this book, to design an ideal
Roman alphabet upon geometrical and aesthetic principles.

_The Alphabet & Elements of Lettering_, Frederic W. Goudy, isbn
0-486-20792-7. Revised 1942 edition.

This very interesting book looks at the history of letter shapes as well
font design.

_The Mac is Not a Typewriter_, Robin Williams, Peachpit Press.

A good, clear explanation of what typography is, and how to get it from
your computer. Mac-specific, but full of excellent general advice. I
think there's also a PC version. Available at most computer bookstores

_Rhyme and Reason: A Typographic Novel_, Erik Spiekermann, H. Berthold
AG, ISBN 3-9800722-5-8.

_Printing Types_ (2 vols), Daniel Berkely Updike, Dover Press.

Affordable edition of the most readable history of type, lots of
illustrations.

Notes: Both the Dover and Harvard U. P. editions were 2 volumes. The
Dover editions were paperback and the Harvard hardback. It appears that
the Dover edition is out of print. Collectible HUP editions are not
cheap although later HUP editions may be had. Most libraries have later
HUP and Dover editions. If someone knows of a source, please pass it
along.

_The Art of Hand Lettering_, Helm Wotzkow, Dover Press, reprint from
1952.

_Looking Good In Print_, Roger C. Parker, Ventana Press, ISBN:
0-940087-32-4.

Well, as a beginner's book, [it] isn't bad. I can't say that I agree
with the author's tastes all the time, but he at least gives some good
examples. Also there are some nice _Publish_-style makeovers. Don Hosek
`dhosek@ymir.claremont.edu`

_Book Design: A Practical Introduction_, Douglas Martin, Van Nostrand
Reinhold, New York: 1989. 206pp.

Along with Jan White's book (see below), this provides a fairly complete
guide to book design. Martin's book is somewhat more conservative in
outlook and also reflects his UK background. Don Hosek
`dhosek@ymir.claremont.edu`

Digital Typography: An Introduction to Type and Composition for Computer
System Design, Richard Rubinstein, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Massachusetts: 1988. 340pp.

An interesting, technological approach to typography which is worth
reading although not necessarily always worth believing. A not
insubstantial portion of the text is dedicated to representing type on a
CRT display and Rubinstein devotes some time to expressing
characteristics of typography numerically. Don Hosek
`dhosek@ymir.claremont.edu`

_Graphic Design for the Electronic Age_, Jan V. White, Watson-Guptill
Publications, New York: 1988. 212pp.

A good handbook for document design. In a well-organized approach, White
covers the principles for laying out most of the typographics features
of a technical document. White is a bit overeager to embrace sans-serif
types and in places his layout ideas seem a bit garish, but it's still a
quite worthwhile book. Don Hosek `dhosek@ymir.claremont.edu`

_Xerox Publishing Standards: A Manual of Style and Design_,
Watson-Guptill Publications, New York: 1988. 400pp.

Overall, a disappointing book. It is divided into four sections of
widely varying intent: “Publishing Process,” “Document Organization,”
“Writing and Style” and “Visual Design.” None of them is really adequate
for the task and all are highly centered on the Xerox method for
publishing. As a guide to Xerox' process, it succeeds, but as a manual
for general use, it falls far short. In print. Don Hosek
`dhosek@ymir.claremont.edu`

_Methods of Book Design (3rd edition)_, Hugh Williamson, Yale University
Press, New Haven: 1983. 408pp.

It is a bit out-of-date as regards technology, but on issues relating
purely to design it is comprehensive and definitive. Well, I suppose it
could be argued that printing technology influences design -- e.g. some
types look fine in metal but lousy in digital imagesetting -- and
therefore a book that is out-of-date in technology can't really be
“definitive” in matters of design either. In any event, _Methods_ is
more than adequate for a beginner's needs. My paper-bound copy (ISBN
0-300-03035-5) was $13.95; cheap at twice the price! Cameron Smith
`cameron@symcom.math.uiuc.edu`

_The Thames & Hudson Manual of typography_, Rauri McLean, Thames &
Hudson

An excellent book if you start getting more interested in type. Look for
Rauri McLean's other books after this one... Liam R.E. Quin `lee@sq.com`

_Typography and Why it matters_, Fernand Baudin.

There is no better introduction than [it]. It's not a primer on subjects
such as “what does Avant Garde look like,” or “This is a good font for
books.” It is a good primer on the things you need to know before the
rest should be considered. He's a lovely writer, to boot.

[My copy is at work, so I may have munged the title--look up Baudin in
“Books in Print” and improvise :-)]

Ari Davidow `ari@netcom.com`

_Better Type_, Betty Binns

It's definitely not a lightweight beginner's introduction, but I've
found [it] to be indispensable. It's a large-format hardcover, but you
can find it remaindered for cheap if you look around. The book goes into
great detail about how factors like line spacing, line length, point
size, and design of typeface (evenness of stroke weight, x-height, etc.)
affect readability. When you've gotten the basics out of the way and
want to learn more about the fine nuances of type color, this book is an
absolute must. David Mandl `dmandl@bilbo.shearson.com`

_Printing Types: An Introduction..._, S. Lawson, (revised) 1990

I'd also recommend Alexander S. Lawson's books especially /Printing
Types: An Intro.../ (revised), 1990, which includes electronic types
now. Bill Ricker `wdr@world.std.com`

_Tally of Types_, Stanley Morrison, Cambridge University Press.

A keepsake for CUP on the Monotype fonts he'd acquired for them when he
was Type Advisor to both Brit.Monotype & CUP (Cambridge University
Press, Cambs.UK), which discusses his hindsight on some of the great
revival fonts and some of the better new fonts. Bill Ricker
`wdr@world.std.com`

_Chicago Manual of Style_, University of Chicago Press, 1982; ISBN
0-226-10390-0.

The chapter on Design and Typography is most directly relevant, but
there are a lot of hints scattered all through the Chicago Manual on
making your words more readable and your pages more attractive. Stan
Brown `brown@ncoast.org`

_X Window System Administrator's Guide_ (O'Reilly X Window System
Guides, volume 8), O'Reilly

It gives advice about setting up fonts, etc. Liam Quin `lee@sq.com`

_How Bodoni intended his types to look_ Bodoni, Giambattista. Fregi e
Majuscole Incise e Fuse de ... Bodoni, Harvard University Library
(repr).

Inexpensive collectible, reproduced as a keepsake by the Houghton
Library at Harvard. [wdr]

_The Elements of Typographic Style_, Robert Bringhurst, Hartley & Marks
0-88179-033-8 pbk $15, Z246.B74 1992 0-88179-110-5 cloth, $25.

A typography for desktop publishers who want to absorb some style.
Informed by the historical european tradition and the desktop
advertising, tempered by oriental yin-yang and examples. A page-turner
with repeat-read depth.

The only book I've seen that discusses page proportions that admits
there are more than three ways that describes how to find one that feels
good for your page. [wdr]

Hermann Zapf on the cover-blurb: “All desktop typographers should study
this book. ... I wish to see this book become the Typographers' Bible.”

_Printing It_, Clifford Burke, Ballantine, 0-345-02694-2.

Manual for the hobby letterpress printer. [wdr]

_Twentieth Century Type Designers_, Sebastian Carter, Taplinger, 1987.

Discusses the talented adaptators of old faces to machine caster and
film/laser, as well as the designers of new works. Indexed? [wdr]

_Design with Type_, Carl Dair, University of Toronto Press,
0-8020-1426-7.

In print again (or still?); the ISBN above may be stale.

A great introduction to the issues of practicality and taste that
confront the users of type. A prized possession. I only regret that the
book does not include among the excerpts from his Westvaco pamphlets the
Seven Don'ts of Typography. [wdr]

_Typography 6: The Annual of the Type Directors Club_, Susan Davis, ed.,
Watson-Guptill, 0-8230-5540-x.

_Specimens of Type Faces in the U.S. G.P.O._, John J. Deviny, director.,
US G.P.O.

_Practice of Typography: Plain Printing Types_, Theodore Low De Vinne,
Century Co./DeVinne Press.

One of the earlier critical studies, in four volumes of which this is my
personal favorite, and still a classic reference. If one wants to
understand 18th and 19th century typography in context, this writer
lived the transition from eclectic to standard sizes, and comments with
taste. [wdr]

_An Essay on Typography_, Eric Gill, Godine, 0-87923-762-7.

_The Alphabet and Elements of Lettering_, Frederic W. Goudy, Dorset
Press (Marboro Books), 0-88029-330-6

Lovely. A wonderful way to learn Goudy's taste.

_Stanley Morison Displayed_, Herbert Jones, Frederick Muller Ltd / W,
0-584-10352-2.

Lovely. A wonderful way to learn Morrison's taste.

_Printing Types: An Introduction..._, Alexander S. Lawson et. al.,
Beacon 1971,?Godine? 1990; (2nd Ed includes electronic types now)

“Good introduction to comparisons of typefaces, with a detailed history
and a key family or face of each general category. Denounces rigid
indexes of type faces.” [wdr]

_Anatomy of a Typeface_, Alexander Lawson, Godine, 0-87923-333-8,
Z250.L34 1990

Deep description of the authors' favorite exemplar and its influences
and relatives in each type category. It follows, without explicating,
the category system developed in the prior book. [wdr]

_Types of Typefacs and how to recognize them_, J. Ben Lieberman,
Sterling, 1968

“This isn't very good really, but it does give lots of examples of the
main categories.” [Liam] [Old bibliographies praised this one, but I
haven't seen it so I can't comment.-- wdr]

_Tally of Types_ (& other titles), Stanley Morrison, Cambridge U. Press.

A keepsake for CUP on the Monotype fonts he'd acquired for them when he
was Type Advisor to both Brit. Monotype & CUP (Cambridge University
Press, Cambs.UK), which discusses his hindsight on some of the great
revival fonts and some of the better new fonts. [wdr]

_Rookledge's International Type Finder 2nd_, Perfect, Christopher and
Gordon Rookledge, Ed Moyer Bell Ltd / Rizzoli, 1-55921-052-4, Z250.P42
pass:[[1st Ed was NY: Beil 1983]]

“Lg. trade pb. Indexed by stylistic & characteristic features. Shows
A-Z, a-z, 0-9 in primary figures, whether lining or ranging.
Particularly distinctive sorts are marked for ease of comparison.
Separate tables collect the distinctive characters for assistance in
identifying a sample.” [wdr]

_English Printers' Ornaments_, Henry R. Plomer, Burt Franklin

_Paragraphs on Printing_, Bruce Rogers, [Rudge] Dover, 0-486-23817-2

Digital Typography: An Introduction to Type and Composition for Computer
System Design, Richard Rubinstein, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Massachusetts: 1988. 340pp.

For people who are disappointed with how the type looks on the laser,
this book explains the subleties of that medium and of the screen that
others miss. This is a study of the Human Factors of computer
typographic systems. [wdr]

_The Case for Legibility_, John Ryder, The Bodley Head, 0-370-30158-7,
Z250.A4

_The Solotype Catalog of 4,147 Display typefaces_, Dan X. Solo, Dover,
0-486-27169-2, Z250.5.D57S654 19

“Working catalog of a specialty Graphics Arts shop. They use proprietary
optical special effects techniques to get Desktop Publishing effects,
and more, without the laser-printer grain. Great listing of 19th Century
Decorated Types -- probably the largest collection in the world. Prices
to order headlines from them are NOT cheap however. Their services are
for professional or serious hobby use only. Solo's previous Dover books
show some number of complete alphabets of a general peculiar style; this
one shows small fragments of his entire usable collection, important as
an index. (According to private correspondence, they have more faces
that have not yet been restored to usable condition.) Not well indexed,
but indexed.” [wdr]

_Stop Stealing Sheep & find out how type works_, Erik Spiekermann & E.M.
Ginger., Adobe Press, 1993

Introductory, motivational. If you wonder why there are so many type
faces in the world, this is the book for you! [Liam] [The title refers
to the old joke: “A man who would letterspace lowercase would also steal
sheep.” [wdr]]

_The Art & Craft of Handmade Paper_, Vance Studley, Dover,
0-486-26421-1, TS1109.S83 1990

_Letters of Credit_, Walter Tracey, Godine Press

“I can't recommend this too highly. It's not as introductory as the
Sheep Book, but conveys a feeling of love and respect for the letter
forms, and covers a lot of ground very, very well.” [Liam]

_Printing Types: Their History, Forms & Use_, Daniel Berkely Updike,
Harvard University Press, reprint by Dover.

The standard reference. Tour-de-force history of type and type-styles. A
trifle conservative in its biases, but typography is conservative for
good reason: readability. Check the addenda for his final words on newer
faces. [wdr]

\1. I believe the Dover edition to be 3 vols Pbk; both the collectable
and later Harvard U.P. editions were two vols hbk.

\2. I am informed by my bookseller & Books In Print that the Dover
edition is out of print. *sigh* If a source be known, let me know.
Collectible HUP eds are not cheap, although later HUP eds may be had.
Most libararies have later HUP or Dover eds. [wdr]

_Modern Encyclopedia of Typefaces, 1960-90_, Lawrence W. Wallis, Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 0-442-30809-4, Z250.W238 1990

“Gives examples of most typefaces, almost all digital, designed &
distributed in the last 30 years. Cross indexed by foundry and designer,
and sources and looks-likes. Some historical bits. Shows full
a-z,A-Z,0-9, a few points (punctuation); and 0-9 again if both lining
and oldstyle supplied. Only complaint is that it omits small caps even
from what few fonts have 'em and the accented characters, of which most
have some but too few. List $25.” [wdr]

_About Alphabets: Some Marginal Notes on Type Design_, Hermann Zapf, MIT
Press, 0-262-74003-6

_Hermann Zapf & His Design Philosophy_, Hermann Zapf, Society of
Typographic Arts, Chicago

“Anything about, by, or vaguely connected with Hermann Zapf is probably
worth reading several times :-)” [Liam]

_Manuale Typographicum_, Hermann Zapf, MIT Press, 0-262-74004-4

There are two books of this title (portrait and landscape); this is the
only mass-market edition of either. Both are Zapf's selections of
interesting typographical quotations in his inimitable display
typography. [wdr]

_Microsoft Windows 3.1 Programmer's Reference_, Microsoft Press.

Documents the Panose system of typeface classification. Probably
contains a general discussion of TrueType under MS Windows 3.1.

_Introduction to Typography, 3rd ed_, Faber, London, 1962.

A very good introduction for any beginner. Also discusses things like
illustrations and cover design, although not in great detail.

Simon was a purist, as the editor of the 3rd edition remarks. He did not
mention phototypesetting in his original edition, but some observations
on its uses and abuses have since been added. Anders Thulin
`ath@linkoping.trab.se`

Eve Damaziere contributes:

_Twentieth Century Type_, Lewis Blackwell, Calmann & King, London (GB),
1992. Chez Flammarion (1993 - 256 p.) pour l'edition francaise (french
edition).

It's a very intelligent account of the history of type in our century,
and its links to art, technics and politics (history). Lots of pictures,
too. At the end of it, a "description and classification of types", from
the 15th century up to now : the author follows the classification of
Maximilien Vox (1952), a french graphist.

[ed: additional bibliographic information appears in the file
“Additional-bibliography” on
_http://www.ora.com/homepages/comp.fonts/FAQ.html_. I have not yet had
time to integrate this bibliographic information into the FAQ]

== Font Encoding Standards

=== What is a character set?

A character set is a collection of symbols in a specific order. Some
common character sets are ASCII and ISO Latin 1.

=== What is an encoding vector?

The term “encoding vector” is most frequently heard in the context of
PostScript fonts. An encoding vector embodies a particular character
set, it is simply the list of all the characters in the character set in
the order in which they occur.

Most font technologies limit a particular encoding to 256 characters; an
Adobe Type 1 font, for example, may contain an arbitrary number of
characters, but no single encoding vector can contain more than 256.

Some common encodings are:

[cols=",",]
|====================================================================
|Adobe Standard Encoding |the default encoding of many PS Type1 fonts
|Apple Standard Encoding |the default encoding on a Mac
|US ASCII |seven bit ASCII
|ISO Latin-1 |an eight bit multi-national character set encoding
|Cork Encoding |the TeX community's eight bit standard
|FC |an eight bit encoding for African languages
|TeX text |the TeX community's seven bit defacto standard (CMR)
|====================================================================

=== Where can I get them?

You can get tables showing the layout of many standard character sets
from the Kermit distribution (via anonymous ftp from
`watsun.cc.columbia.edu` in `/kermit/charsets`.

== PostScript

=== What About PostScript UNIQUEIDs?

This section was constructed from a posting by Johannes Schmidt-Fischer
in Jun 1993.

All PostScript Type 1 fonts should contain a UniqueId. This is a number
which should be, as the name suggests, unique (at least among the fonts
that you download to the printer at any given time).

There are many PostScript fonts on the 'Net which have identical
UniqeIds. If two of these fonts are downloaded to the same printer at
the same time, attempts to use either font may cause the wrong
characters to be printed.

In a nutshell, the reason that the wrong characters may be printed is
that the printer may be storing the rendered glyphs in its font cache,
addressed by UniqueID. So, if two fonts, /Foo and /Bar, both have
UniqueID=5 and /Foo's 10pt “A” is currently in the cache, a request for
/Bar's 10pt “A” will cause the wrong character to be printed. Rather
than rendering /Bar's “A” from its (correct and unambiguous) outline,
the printer will note that the cache contains a 10pt “A” for font 5 and
will copy it from the cache (resulting in /Foo's “A” printing for /Bar).

Adobe's “Red Book” contains a detailed discussion of this topic.

=== Can a Type 1 Font Be Shaded?

David Lemon contributes:

There are three ways to get grey into a font. The first is to make a
series of Type 1 fonts, each of which will be used for a single shade of
grey (or other color). The user then sets copies of the characters on
top of each other, selecting each and setting it to the shade desired.
It's a bit inconvenient (and won't work in a word processor) but it gets
full resolution, good hinting and gives the user lots of control. This
is the approach Adobe has used in its "chromatic" fonts (as in Adobe
Wood Type 3 and Copal) and is viable for both Type 1 and TrueType
formats.

As an alternative, the designer can approximate shades of grey in the
characters by using many little dots (a sort of halftone effect) or
lines (as in cross-hatching). This leads to pretty complex characters,
which may choke some rasterizers, and won't hint well. As with the first
method, this is viable (more or less) for both Type 1 and TrueType.

The third method is more direct but limited. In this approach, the
designer/producer creates the shades of grey in a font-editing program.
The limitation is that such a font must be written in Type 3, which is a
generalized PostScript format (Type 1 and TrueType recognize only solid
shapes). Such a font won't be supported by ATM, so your screen display
will suffer and you'll be restricted to PostScript printers. On the plus
side, your greys will be rendered at the full resolution of the printer
you use.

== TrueType

George Moore announces the following information regarding TrueType
fonts:

“I am pleased to announce that there is now one central location for all
official Microsoft TrueType information available on the Internet. The 9
files listed below are available for anonymous ftp access on
ftp.microsoft.com in the /developr/drg/TrueType-Info directory. The most
important of those files is the TrueType Font Files Specifications, a
400 page book which describes in excruciating detail how to build a
TrueType font. Other information is also available in the same directory
and other files will be added from time to time.

For those people who do not have ftp access to the Internet can find the
same information available for downloading on Compuserve in the
Microsoft developer relations forum (GO MSDR) in the TrueType library.

Please be aware that the TrueType specifications is a copyrighted work
of Microsoft and Apple and can not be resold for profit.

TrueType developer information files on ftp.microsoft.com:

`ttspec1.zip`; `ttspec2.zip`; `ttspec3.zip`::
  The TrueType Specification:
  +
  These three compressed files contain the “TrueType Font Files
  Specifications”, a 400 page book complete with illustrations which
  details how to construct a TrueType font from scratch (or build a tool
  to do so), the TrueType programming language, and the complete format
  of each sub-table contained in the .TTF file. These documents are
  stored in Word for Windows 2.0 format and require Windows 3.1 for
  printing. See the “readme.doc” (in ttspec1.zip) for printing
  instructions. Requires 2.5MB of disk space after uncompression.
  +
  This manual is a superset of the similar specifications from Apple and
  has added information specific to Windows that is not present in the
  Apple version.
`ttfdump.zip`::
  An MS-DOS executable which will dump the contents of a TrueType font
  out in a human-readable fashion. It allows you to dump the entire
  font, or just specific sub-tables. This tool, combined with the
  specifications above, allows very effective debugging or exploration
  of any TrueType font. For example, to dump the contents of the 'cmap'
  (character code to glyph index mapping) table, enter:
  `ttfdump fontname.ttf -tcmap -nx`
  Entering “ttfdump” with no options will give you a help message.
`ttfname.zip`::
  Example C source code on how to parse the contents of a TrueType font.
  Although this particular example will open up the file and locate the
  font name contained within the 'name' table, it could be readily
  adapted to parse any other structure in the file. This compressed zip
  file also contains many useful include files which have pre-defined
  structures set up for the internal tables of a TrueType font file.
  This code may be useful for developers who wish to parse the TrueType
  data stream returned by the GetFontData() API in Windows 3.1.
`tt-win.zip`::
  A 31 page Word for Windows 2.0 document which is targeted for the
  Windows developer who is interested in learning about some of the
  capabilities TrueType adds to Windows 3.1. Contains many
  illustrations.
`embeddin.zip`::
  A text file which describes all of the information necessary for a
  Windows developer to add TrueType font embedding capabilities to their
  application. Font embedding allows the application to bundle the
  TrueType fonts that were used in that document and transport it to
  another platform where the document can be viewed or printed
  correctly.
`tt-talk.zip`::
  The TrueType Technical Talks 1 and 2. These text files describe some
  of the things that are happening with TrueType behind the scenes in
  Windows 3.1. The first document walks the reader through all of the
  steps that occur from when the user first presses the key on the
  keyboard until that character appears on the screen (scaling, hinting,
  drop out control, caching and blitting). The second talk describes one
  of the unique features of TrueType called non-linear scaling which
  allows the font vendor to overcome some of the physical limitations of
  low resolution output devices.
`lucida.zip`::
  This text file contains useful typographic information on the 22
  Lucida fonts which are contained in the Microsoft TrueType Font Pack
  for Windows. It gives pointers on line-layout, mixing and matching
  fonts in the family and a little history on each typeface. This
  information was written by the font's designers, Chuck Bigelow & Kris
  Holmes.”

== Unicode

[ed: This is a summary of the Unicode info I've gleaned from the net
recently, the whole Unicode issue needs to be addressed better by the
FAQ...someday... someday...I'll get to reorganize the whole thing]

=== What Is Unicode?

Charles A. Bigelow notes:

The authors of the Unicode standard emphasize the fact that Unicode is a
_character encoding_, not a _glyph encoding_. This might seem like a
metaphysical distinction, in which characters have some “semantic”
content (that is, they signify something to literates) and and glyphs
are particular instantiations or renderings of characters—Plato talked
about this kind of stuff—but in practice it means that most ligatures
are not represented in Unicode, nor swash variants, nor figure variants
(except for superior and inferior, which are semantically distinct from
baseline figures), and so on.

For further information, consult _The Unicode Standard: Worldwide
Character Encoding_ Version 1.0, Vol. 1 (alphabets & symbols) and Vol 2.
(Chinese, Japanese, Korean characters), by The Unicode Consortium,
Addison Wesley Publishing Co, 1991, ISBN 0-201-56788-1, 0-201-60845-6.

=== What is the Unicode Consortium?

The Unicode Consortium is an international body responsible for
maintaining the Unicode standard. Their email address is
`unicode-inc@unicode.org`

To obtain more information on Unicode or to order their printed material
and/or diskettes contact:

....
Steven A. Greenfield
Unicode Office Manager
1965 Charleston Road
Mountain View, CA 94043
Tel. 415-966-4189
Fax. 415-966-1637
....

=== Unicode Editing

James Matthew Farrow contributes:

I use `sam' for all by text editing. It is X editor based on an editor
for the blit called jim. Papers describing sam as well as a distribution
of sam itself are available for ftp from research.att.com. The sam there
is a Unix port of the Plan 9 version. Plan 9 is a full unicode operating
system, even around before NT! The libraries sam is built upon therefore
support 16 bit wide characters. The graphics library, supplied with it
at present does not. However they may be planning to distribute a new
version which does soon. The library just plugs in replacing the library
that comes with sam. No modification is necessary. Character are stored
using the utf-2 encoding.

All of the files I had before I started working with sam were 7 bit
ascii so no conversion was needed. Now I have ditched xterm in favour of
9term: a terminal emulator in the style of 81/2 (the Plan 9 interface).
This lets me type Unicode characters on the command line, as part of
filenames, in mail, wherever and most Unix utilities cope without
modification. This is about to be released. I'm looking for beta
testers. ;-)

==== Is a special keyboard required?

No. ASCII Characters are typed as normal. Common characters above 0x7f
are typed using two letter abbreviations. The table is similar to the
troff special character codes, e.g, Alt-12 gives you a 1/2, Alt-'e gives
you e acute, Alt-bu a bullet and so on. This table is hardwired into the
library at present but is trivial to change. Other codes are accessed by
typing their hex value, for instance the smiley is Alt-X263a (0x263a
being a smiley character in the Unicode character set).

==== Is roman-to-Unicode conversion available?

All normal 7 bit ascii characters are encoded as themselves so no
translation is needed. There are conversion routines in the library
(runetochar and chartorune) which will do the conversion and it should
be pretty simple to convert files already in another format. You would
have to write something to do the transliteration yourself. A small
patch to the system would let you enter different language `modes' for
text entry.

=== Are there PostScript or TrueType fonts available?

Apparently there is a version of the Lucida fonts by Bigelow and Holmes
which support Unicode. This is the information I have on them.

pass:[[ed: quoting another source]]

[Windows NT] will ship with a Unicode TrueType font containing
approximately 1,500 characters. The font is called "Lucida Sans Unicode"
and was specifically designed by Bigelow and Holmes for Microsoft to
contain the following Unicode sets:

....
ASCII
Latin 1
European Latin
Extended Latin
Standard Phonetic
Modifier Letters
Generic Diacritical
Greek
Cyrillic
Extended Cyrillic
Hebrew
Currency Symbols
Letterlike Symbols
Arrows
Mathematical Operators
Super & Subscript
Form & Chart Components
Blocks
Geometric Shapes
Miscellaneous Technical
Miscellaneous Dingbats
....

The bitmap fonts which comes with the utf version of the libXg graphics
library (the library upon which sam is built) support a sparse subset of
the full character set. That is, only a few of them have glyphs at
present. A font editor such as xfedor would let you add more. The list
of those currently available is pretty much as the above list.

I use 9term and sam as a matter of course now and have for several
months. I enjoy the convenience of putting special characters and
accented characters in my mail as well as being able to do some phonetic
work all in the one terminal/editor suite.

== Can I Print Checks with the MICR Font?

This comes up all the time: standard ordinary laser toner is magnetic
and will be read by the banks. The gotcha is that standard laser toner
rubs off in the *very* high-speed sorting equipment that are used, and
this makes read rates drop low and the banks will hate you.

I researched check printers for a customer, and was surprised to find
this. The Troy(tm) printers he bought are basically stock Ricoh engines
that have slightly tighter paper handling (for registration), plus they
add a proprietary Teflon-type powder coating on the output path to coat
the checks.

I saw some examples of checks printed with and without this special
coating after running through something like 40 passes through check
processing equipment, and the one without the coating was a mess. These
require special handling that the banks do *not* like. Apparently, they
go after companies that issue these kinds of checks with special
processing fees.

== Rules of Thumb

It is difficult to set out guidelines for font usage, because almost any
rule can be brilliantly broken under the right circumstances.

=== General guidelines

* Never lose track of the kind of work you're doing. An effect that
would ruin a newsletter might be just the thing for a record cover. Know
when you can safely sacrifice legibility for artistic effect.
* Keep in mind the final reproduction process you'll be using. Some
effects (like reversed type, white on black) can be hard to read off an
ordinary 300-dpi laser, but will work if finals are done on a
high-resolution printer, such as a Linotronic. Will the pages be
photocopied? Offset? Onto rough paper, shiny paper? All these factors
can and should influence your choice of fonts and how you use them.
* Running some comparative tests is a good idea. Better to blow off a
few sheets of laser paper now than to see a problem after thousands of
copies are made.
* No one can teach you font aesthetics; it must be learned by example.
Look at beautiful magazines, posters, books with wide eyes, so that you
can see how it's done. Examine ugly printed matter critically and
consider why it's hard to read.

=== Good rules of thumb

* If you need a condensed font, find one that was designed that way,
rather than scaling an existing font down to a percentage. Any scaling
distorts a font's design; excessive scaling interferes with legibility -
this goes for widening as well as narrowing. Extended faces do exist,
although they aren't as common as condensed ones.
* Many people feel that bold or italic type, or type in ALL CAPS, is
more legible: “This is the most important part of the newsletter, let's
put it in bold.” In fact, legibility studies show that such type is
actually harder to read in bulk. Keep the text in a normal style and
weight, and find another way to emphasize it - box it, illustrate it,
run it in color, position it focally.
* Too much reverse type - white on black - is hard on the eyes. It can
be a nice effect if used sparingly. Don't reverse a serif font, though -
its details will tend to fill in. Stick to reversing bold sans-serifs,
and remember to space them out a bit more than usual.
* It is always safest to use a plain serif font for large amounts of
text. Because Times is widely used, it doesn't mean it should be
avoided. Fonts like Palatino, Times, Century Old Style are deservedly
popular because people can read a lot of text set in such faces without
strain.
+
Don't expect anyone to read extensive text set in a condensed font.
* As point size gets bigger, track tighter, and (if the software allows)
reduce the spacebands as well. A spaceband in a headline size (anything
over 14 point) should be about as wide as a letter “i”.
* If you only have a few large headlines, hand-kerning the type, pair by
pair, can make the end result much more pleasing. Besides, working with
fonts this closely makes them familiar.
* Column width and justification are major elements in design. The
narrower the column, the smaller the type can be; wide rows of small
type are very hard to read. Often it's a better idea to set narrow
columns flush left rather than justified, otherwise large gaps can fall
where hyphenation isn't possible.
* Use curly quotes.
* Don't put two spaces at the end of a line (. ) instead of (. ) when
using a proportionally spaced font.

== Acknowledgements

The moderators would like to express their gratitude to the whole
community for providing insightful answers to innumerable questions. In
particular, the following people (listed alphabetically) have
contributed directly to this FAQ (apologies, in advance, if anyone has
been forgotten):

....
Masumi Abe
Glenn Adams
Daniel Amor
Borris Balzer
Charles A. Bigelow
David J. Birnbaum
Tim Bradshaw
Morgan S. Brilliant
Arlen Britton
Stan Brown
Scott Brumage
Lee Cambell
Terry Carroll
Gerd Castan
Ari Davidow
Eve Damaziere  (c/o Stephane Bortzmeyer)
Lawrence D'Oliveiro
Pat Farrell
James Matthew Farrow
Stephen Friedl
Peter J. Gentry
Yossi Gil
Timothy Golobic
Kesh Govinder
Piercarlo Antonio Grandi
Robert Green
Rick Heli
Jeremy Henderson
Henry ???
Gary
Berthold K.P. Horn
Peter Honig
Don Hosek
Bharathi Jagadeesh
Chang Jin-woong
Darrell Leland
David Lemon
Jon
???
???
Otto Makela
David Mandl
Kate McDonnell
George Moore
Robert Morris
Stephen Moye
Erlend Nagel
Terry O'Donnell
Rick Pali
Sean Palmer
Jon Pastor
PenDragon
Stephen Peters
Bill Phillips
Thomas W. Phinney
Jim Reese
Bill Ricker
Liam Quin
Henry Schneiker
Tom Scott
Bill Shirley
Cameron Smith
Daniel S. Smith
Frank F. Smith
Werenfried Spit
Anthony Starks
Ike Stoddard
Danny Thomas
Anders Thulin
Ian Tresman
Bill Troop
Erik-Jan Vens
Amanda Walker
Jason Lee Weiler
....

== A Brief Introduction to Typography

Space, time, and bandwidth are too limiting to provide a complete
introduction to typography in this space. I'd be very willing to make
one available for anonymous ftp, if you want to write one, but I'm not
going to write it--I have neither the time nor the expertise. However,
the following description of Times, Helvetica, and Courier will suffice
for a start. For more information, several books on typography are
listed in the bibliography.

=== Comments by Laurence Penney:

Laurence Penney offers the following description of Times, Helvetica,
and Courier:

Times is a typeface designed in the 1930s for the Times newspaper in
London and is now used widely in books, magazines and DTP. Its design is
based on the typographical principles evolved since Roman times (upper
case) and the 16th century (lower case). It is called a TRANSITIONAL
typeface, after the typefaces of the 17th century which it resembles.
Like all typefaces designed for typesetting large quantities of text, it
is proportionally spaced: the i takes about a third the width of an M.
Personally I don't like Times too much and prefer the more elegant
Garamond and Baskerville, but these will probably cost you money...
Note: The Transitionals came after the Old Styles (like Garamond) and
before the Moderns (like Bodoni).

Helvetica is an example of a SANS-SERIF typeface. These first appeared
in the late 19th century in Germany and flourished in the 1920s and 30s,
when they were regarded as the future of typography. It's more a
geometric design than the humanist design of Gill Sans, but less
geometric than Avant Garde and Futura. To my mind it lacks elegance, and
Adrian Frutiger's Univers shows how this kind of typeface should be
done. (Just compare the B, R, Q, a, g of Univers and Helvetica to see
what I mean -- and don't you just love Univers's superbly interpreted
ampersand ?!) Helvetica is one of the few fonts that is improved by its
BOLD version.

Another interesting approach to sans-serif is Optima, by Hermann Zapf,
which keeps the stroke-weight variations which sans-serifs usually
reject. Use sans-serif fonts for the same applications as Times, above,
but where you're less concerned with elegance, and more with a
functional appearance - they're generally reckoned to be slightly less
legible than good serifed fonts. They're also very suitable for display
work.

Courier is a typeface derived from typewriter styles. It should ONLY be
used when you want to simulate this effect (e.g. when writing letters
Courier usually appears “friendlier” than Times). Like all typewriter
fonts, it is MONOSPACED (characters all have the same width) and is thus
suitable for typesetting computer programs. However there are nicer
looking monospace fonts than Courier (which has oversize serifs), that
still remain distinct from the text fonts like Times and Helvetica. A
good one is OCR-B, designed by Frutiger. Note that monospaced fonts are
less economical on space than proportional fonts.

[ed: Following the original posting of this message, Laurence Penny and
Jason Kim discussed the issue privately. The following summary of their
discussion may serve to clarify some of the more subtle points. My
thanks to Laurence and Jason for allowing me to include this in the
FAQ.]

LP-1> The Transitionals came after the Old Styles (like Garamond) and
before the Moderns (like Bodoni).

JK> Not necessarily true! Ideologically, yes, but not chronologically. I
believe, for example, that Bodoni predates New Century Schoolbook or
some such typeface.

LP-2> What I meant by “X came after Y” was “the first examples of X
appeared after the first examples of Y” -- it's called precis. Some
people still make steam trains, but you can still say “Steam engines
came before diesels.” This is chronological, not ideological in my book.

…

LP-1> Another interesting approach to sans-serif is Optima, by Hermann
Zapf, which keeps the stroke-weight variations which sans-serifs usually
reject. Use sans-serif fonts for the same applications as Times, above,
but where you're less concerned with elegance, and more with a
functional appearance - they're generally reckoned to be slightly less
legible than good seriffed fonts. They're also very suitable for display
work.

JK> Slightly? I have several textbooks typeset by utter fools and they
are a pain in the ass (and eyes) to read! Please don't encourage anyone
to use Optima (or any sans serif fonts for that matter) “for the same
applications as Times,” which, need I remind you, was designed for
*newspaper* work!!

LP-2> OK, maybe I was a little over-generous to Univers, Helvetica,
etc., but I think variation is extremely important in typography. Have
you ever read the British magazine “CAR” ? That uses Helvetica light (I
think) in a very legible and attractive way, IMO. I agree, though,
Optima is crappy for text, but it's a very valuable experiment and looks
beautiful when printed in high quality for titling, etc. And yes,
*books* in Helvetica are generally awful.

…

JK> Serifs have been scientifically shown to be a *lot* easier on the
reader, as they guide the eyes along the lines.

LP-2> In all tests I've seen the serifs have always won the day, but
only with certain seriffed fonts, and fonts like Univers aren't far
behind. The “tracking” advantage for serif fonts is reduced when you're
talking about narrow newspaper/magazine columns.

…

JK> You wrote a pretty short and partial history of type. Why ignore the
roots of type (blackletter) as well as the climax (moderns--give an
explanation) and subsequent 'post-modern' revivals?

LP-2> I was just talking about the place the 3 most common DTP types
hold in the history of typography, and a few associated pitfalls. It
wasn't meant as a “history of typography” at all. Please feel free to
provide such a history yourself.

JK> I think any short list of specific faces is incomplete without
mention of Palatino, the most popular Old Style revival in existence.

LP-2> Do you? To my mind Palatino is grossly over used. You must agree
it looks bad for dense text. It isn't a proper “oldstyle revival” at
all, more of a “calligraphic interpretation” of it. Zapf designed it as
a display face, and wasn't too concerned about lining up the serifs
(check out the “t”). And it just *has* to be printed on 1200dpi devices
(at least) to look good in small sizes. OK then, maybe a short list is
incomplete without a caution NOT to use Palatino...

JK> Also, if this is meant to be a “quick history/user guide for those
fairly new to using fonts on desktop publishing systems,” then I would
recommend more directions about the proper uses of certain faces (e.g.,
Goudy for shaped text, Peignot for display *only*) and styles (e.g.,
italics for editorial comments, all-caps for basically nothing).

LP-2> Okay, okay. I was only sharing a few ideas, not trying to write a
book. Surely you agree that the 3 typefaces I chose are by far the most
commonly used and abused these days? I don't think a discussion of Goudy
or Peignot fits in very well here, unless we're hoping to make a very
wide-ranging FAQL. Regarding styles: first, italics are used principally
for *emphasis* (rather than bold in running text); second, all good
books have a few small caps here and there, don't they? - all mine do...

JK> Sorry if I come across as critical. I think the idea of making a
FAQL is a good one, as is your effort. We just have to make sure it
doesn't give any newbies the wrong impressions and further perpetuate
the typographical morass we're facing today.

LP-2> Sorry if I come across as defensive, but I stand by what I said
and object to the suggestion that I am “perpetuating the typographical
morass”. (I don't know if you really intended this - apologies if you
didn't.)

=== Comments by Don Hosek:

Don Hosek offers the following additional notes:

The “Times” in most printers is actually a newer version of the font
than Monotype's “Times New Roman” which it is originally based on.
Walter Tracy's _Letters of Credit_ gives an excellent history of the
face which was based on Plantin and in the original cutting has metrics
matching the original face almost exactly. Another interesting note
about the face is that it is almost a completely different design in the
bold: this is due to the fact that old-styles are difficult to design as
a bold. Incidentally, the classification of Times as a transitional is
not firm. It likely is placed there by some type taxonomists (most
notably Alexander Lawson) because of the bold and a few minor features.
Others, myself included, think of it as a old style. The typeface listed
in the Adobe catalog as Times Europa was a new face commissioned in 1974
to replace the old Times (whose 50th birthday was this past October
3rd).

Hermann Zapf is not particularly pleased with any of the
phototypesetting versions of Optima. As a lead face, Optima is very
beautiful. His typeface “World”, used in the World Book Encyclopedia is
one recutting for photocomp which improves the font somewhat. He is on
record as saying that if he had been asked, he would have designed a new
font for the technology.

== A Brief History of Type

Thomas W. Phinney contributes the following discussion of the history of
typefootnote:[Version 1.02 14 Apr 1995]:

=== Foreword

It is difficult to cover all the developments and movements of
typography in a short space. My separation of evolving technologies from
the development of typefaces is an artificial one–designs and the
technology used to create them are not truly separable—but perhaps it
is conceptually useful.

Where names of typefaces are used, I attempt to use the original name:
there are often clones with very similar names.

I shall update, clarify and correct this essay periodically, and will be
happy to credit contributors. I can be e-mailed on CompuServe at
75671,2441 (Internet: `75671.2441@compuserve.com`).

=== Type Technology—The Four Revolutions

==== Gutenberg (ca. 1450-1480) & The Impact of Printing

Before the printing press, books were produced by scribes (at first,
primarily based in monasteries, although by the 12th century there were
many lay copiers serving the university market). The process of writing
out an entire book by hand was as labor-intensive as it sounds (try it
some time): so much so that a dozen volumes constituted a library, and a
hundred books was an awe- inspiring collection.

This remained true until the invention of movable type, the perfection
of which is attributed to Johannes Gutenberg (although the Chinese had
it several centuries earlier, and a Dutch fellow named Coster may have
had some crude form a decade earlier). Gutenberg, although a man of
vision, did not personally profit from his invention. He worked for over
a decade with borrowed capital, and his business was repossessed by his
investors before the first mass-produced book was successfully
printed—the Gutenberg Bible of 1454, printed in Mainz by Fust and
Schoeffer.

Gutenberg's basic process remained unchanged for centuries. A punch made
of steel, with a mirror image of the letter is struck into a piece of
softer metal. Molten metal is poured into this, and you get type. The
type is put into a matrix to form the page of text, inked, then pressed
into paper.

Within several decades typesetting technology spread across Europe. The
speed with which it did so is impressive: within the first fifty years,
there were over a thousand printers who set up shops in over two hundred
European cities. Typical print runs for early books were in the
neighborhood of two hundred to a thousand books.

Some of these first printers were artisans, while others were just
people who saw an opportunity for a quick lira/franc/pound. The modern
view of a classical era in which craftsmanship predominated appears
unjustified to scholars: there has always been fine craft, crass
commercialism, and work that combines both.

To those who have grown up with television, radio, magazines, books,
movies, faxes and networked computer communications it is difficult to
describe just how much of a revolution printing was. It was the first
mass medium, and allowed for the free spread of ideas in a completely
unprecedented fashion. The Protestant Reformation might not have
occurred, or might have been crushed, without the ability to quickly
create thousands of copies of Luther's Theses for distribution.

Many groups sought to control this new technology. Scribes fought
against the introduction of printing, because it could cost them their
livelihoods, and religious (and sometimes secular) authorities sought to
control what was printed. Sometimes this was successful: for centuries
in some European countries, books could only be printed by government
authorized printers, and nothing could be printed without the approval
of the Church. Printers would be held responsible rather than authors
for the spread of unwanted ideas, and some were even executed. But this
was a largely futile struggle, and most such restraints eventually
crumbled in the western world.

==== Industrial Revolution: Steam, Line-casting & Automated Punch-cutting (start 1870-95; end 1950-65)

Amazingly, the printing press and the science of typecutting had only
minor refinements from the late 1500s to the late 1800s. Towards the end
of this period, the industrial revolution brought major innovations in
printing technology. Rotary steam presses (steam 1814, rotary 1868)
replaced hand- operated ones, doing the same job in 16 per cent of the
time; photo-engraving took over from handmade printing plates.

Typesetting itself was transformed by the introduction of line-casting
machines, first Ottmar Mergenthaler's Linotype (1889), and then the
Monotype machine. Essentially, line-casting allowed type be chosen,
used, then recirculate back into the machine automatically. This not
only introduced a huge labor savings in typesetting, (again, on the
order of the 85% reduction in printing time), but also rendered obsolete
the huge masses of metal type created by the previously existing type
foundries.

While typesetting and printing speeds increased phenomenally, so did the
speed of punchcutting. In 1885, Linn Boyd Benton (then of Benton, Waldo
& Company, Milwaukee) invented a pantographic device that automated the
previously painstaking process of creating punches. His machine could
scale a drawing to the required size, as well as compressing or
expanding the characters, and varying the weight slightly to compensate
for the larger or smaller size—this last being a crude form of the
“optical scaling” done by skilled typographers making versions of the
same font for different sizes. In optical scaling, the thickest strokes
retain the same relative thickness at any size, but the thinnest strokes
are not simply scaled up or down with the rest of the type, but made
thicker at small sizes and thinner at large display sizes, so as to
provide the best compromise between art and readability.

The economic impact of all these advances on the type industry cannot be
overstated. For example, in the United States, the majority of type
foundries escaped a bankruptcy bloodbath in 1892 by merging into a
single company, called American Type Founders (ATF). Ultimately
twenty-three companies merged into ATF, making it far and away the
dominant American type foundry.

Also around this time, the “point” measurement system finally reached
ascendancy. In the earlier days of printing, different sizes of type had
simply been called by different names. Thus, “Brevier” was simply the
British name for 8-point type of any style. Unfortunately, these names
were not standardized internationally; 8-point type was called “Petit
Texte” by the French and “Testino” by the Italians. Such a naming system
also allowed wonderful confusion, such as “English” referring both to
blackletter type, and a 14-point size; “English English” was thus a
14-point blackletter!

Pierre Simon Fournier had first proposed a comprehensive point system in
1737, with later refinements, but what was ultimately adopted was the
later version developed by Francois Ambroise Didot. This put
approximately 72 points to the inch (and now exactly 72 points to the
inch on most computer- based typesetting systems).

==== Photocomposition (Intertype et. al., start 1950-60, end 1975-85)

The first photocomposition devices (the French “Photon” and Intertype's
Fotosetter) made their debuts as early as 1944, but didn't really catch
on until the early 1950s. Typeface masters for photocomposition are on
film; the characters are projected onto photo-sensitive paper. Lenses
are used to adjust the size of the image, scaling the type to the
desired size. In some senses this technology was an “improvement,”
allowing new freedoms, such as overlapping characters. However, it also
pretty much eliminated optical scaling (see 2.2, above), because in the
rush to convert fonts to the new format, usually only one design was
used, which was directly scaled to the desired size.

==== Digital (start 1973-83)

The earliest computer-based typesetters were a hybrid between the above-
mentioned photocomposition machines and later pure digital output. They
each had their own command language for communicating with output
devices. Although these machines had advantages, they also had problems.
None of these early command languages handled graphics well, and they
all had their own formats for fonts. However, some of these devices are
still in service as of 1995, for use in production environments which
require more speed and less flexibility (phone books, newspapers, flight
schedules, etc.).

In the late 1980s PostScript gradually emerged as the de facto standard
for digital typesetting. This was due to a variety of reasons, including
its inclusion in the Apple Laserwriter printer and its powerful graphics
handling. When combined with the Macintosh (the first widely used
computer with a what-you-see-is-what-you-get display) and PageMaker (the
first desktop publishing program), the seeds were all sown for the
current dominance of computer-based typesetting.

Most high-end typesetting still involves printing to film, and then
making printing plates from the film. However, the increasing use of
high- resolution printers (600-1200 dots per inch) makes the use of
actual printing presses unnecessary for some jobs. And the next step for
press printing is the elimination of film altogether, as is done by a
few special systems today, in which the computer can directly create
printing plates.

Today, although PostScript predominates, there are a variety of
competing page description languages (PostScript, HP PCL, etc.), font
formats (Postscript Type One and Multiple Master, Truetype and Truetype
GX) computer hardware platforms (Mac, Windows, etc.) and desktop
publishing and graphics programs. Digital typesetting is commonplace,
and photocomposition is at least dying, if not all but dead. Digital
typefaces on computer, whether Postscript or some other format, are
generally outline typefaces, which may be scaled to any desired size
(although optical scaling is still an issue).

There has been considerable economic fallout from all this in
typography. Although some digital type design tools are beyond the price
range of the “average” user, many are in the same price range as the
mid- to high-end graphics and desktop publishing programs. This,
combined with the introduction of CD-ROM typeface collections, has moved
digital type away from being an expensive, specialized tool, towards
becoming a commodity. As a result of both this and the brief
photocomposition interregnum, the previously established companies have
undergone major shakeups, and even some major vendors, such as American
Type Founders, have failed to successfully make the digital transition,
and gone bankrupt instead (although at this time ATF appears to be
undergoing a resurrection). More recently, even major digital type
foundries have--dare one say foundered?--on the shoals of ubiquitous
cheap typefaces (even a licensing deal with Corel Corp seems to have
been insufficient to save URW).

Although there is a new accessibility of type design tools for hobbyists
and professional graphic artists, the decreasing value of individual
typefaces has resulted in a decrease in the number of working type
designers per se (both independents and company-employed).

=== Type Forms Through the Centuries

One must keep in mind that although typefaces may have come into use at
a particular point in time, they often continued in general use far
beyond that time. Even after the rise of old style typefaces in the late
1500s, the blackletter type was commonly used for setting text for
several centuries (well into the 1900s in Germany). With later
interpretations of earlier forms being relatively common, the *style* of
a given typeface may belong to a quite different period from that of the
typeface itself! Further, many typefaces have very complex histories: a
type could have been originally designed in metal at one time, reworked
by someone else later, made into a phototypesetting face by another
person, and then later created in digital form by yet another
designer–who might have been working off of any of the above as the
basis of their work.

The classification system used here (old style, transitional, modern,
sans serif, slab serif, etc.) has the virtues of being both simple and
widely used. However, the precision and artistic accuracy of this system
is perhaps dubious: see Robert Bringhurst's Elements of Typographic
Style or his article in the first issue of Serif magazine for a more
thorough system.

In discussing the differences between type, one must refer to a number
of technical terms. For illustrations of these terms, see also the
downloadable graphics file TYPHS_72.GIF or TYPHS300.GIF. The numbers
refer to the dots per inch of the graphic when scaled to a full page: 72
dpi is a low resolution suitable for screen viewing, while 300 dpi is
better-suited to laser printing. With any luck, both should be available
for FTP or download from the same site as this file. If so, you would be
well advised to refer to these pictures for illustrations of both these
terms and the differences between different categories of typefaces. If
you are a newcomer to typography, some sort of visual reference is
essential to understand the differences between fonts explained here.
Your options include: the aforementioned graphics files; type samples
from a book, manual or font vendor's catalog; or simply viewing or
printing out the fonts you have available on your computer system, if
you have a reasonable variety.

==== Definitions

Contrast: The degree of difference between the thick and thin strokes in
a font (if any).

Stress (axis): The angle at which contrast occurs, usually ranging from
vertical to a somewhat back-slanted diagonal. This can best be noted by
looking at, for example, the letter “O” and noting if the bottom left is
thicker than the top left, and the top right is thicker than the bottom
right. If this difference exists, the letter has diagonal stress. If the
two halves of the “O” are a mirror image of each other, with the sides
thicker than the top/bottom, then the letter has vertical stress. If the
top and bottom of the “O” are the same thickness as the sides, there is
neither contrast nor stress.

Serifs: Those “finishing strokes” or “fillips” going off the ending
lines of a letter. For example, when the number “1” or the letter “i”
are drawn with a bar across the bottom, the two halves of the bar are
serifs. If the serif is joined to the letter by a slight flaring out, it
is said to be “bracketed.”

==== Early Letterforms

Although writing itself can be traced back to several millennia B.C., to
Egyptian hieroglyphics and Sumerian cuneiform inscriptions, modern
letter forms have their most immediate heritage in Roman inscriptions
from around 50- 120 AD, such as the one on the base of Trajan's Column
in the Roman Forum (114 AD, digital version by Twombly for Adobe, 1989).

Although early Latin writing was heavily influenced by these chiseled-
in-stone letterforms, over the centuries it evolved into a variety of
other shapes, including uncials and the related Carolingian script. It
is through this period of the sixth to tenth centuries that we see the
development of the lower case (minuscule) letter as a different shape
from the upper case (capital).

Type forms similar to what we now think of as “normal” letter shapes
evolved from the Carolingian (or Caroline) minuscule. The Carolingian
letters are so-called because of their adoption by the Emperor
Charlemagne (late 10th century) as a standard for education. Digital
revivals of these exist, such as Carol Twombly's Charlemagne (1989).

By the fifteenth century, italics also existed, in the form of a cursive
script which had developed in Rome and Florence. However, italics at
this time were a completely separate entity from the upright
letterforms, as they remained in the early days of printing.

==== Blackletter

The first printed types exemplify what most people think of as medieval
or “old English” lettering, with ornate capitals, roughly diamond-shaped
serifs, and thick lines. As a group, these typefaces are called
“blackletter.” They evolved from the Carolingian by a gradual movement
towards narrowing and thickening of lines.

The general sort of blackletter used by Gutenberg in his first Bible is
called textura (a shareware digital version of Gutenberg's bible face is
available, called “Good City Modern”). The other sorts of blackletter
are fraktur, bastarda and rotunda. Probably the most common blackletter
revival typefaces in use today are Cloister Black (M.F. Benton, 1904,
from J.W. Phinney) and Fette Fraktur.

It is worth noting that although these typefaces seem very hard to read
to us today, this is due as much to familiarity as to any objective
lesser clarity. Fraktur was in use in Germany well into the 1900s,
though it was gradually being superseded by Roman typefaces. The Nazis
at first fostered a return to Fraktur, then outlawed it as a “Jewish
typeface” in 1940.

Studies from mid-century found that people can read blackletter with a
speed loss of no more than 15%. However, there is subjectively more
effort involved. Blackletter is today most appropriate for display or
headline purposes, when one wants to invoke the feeling of a particular
era.

==== Old Style Typefaces: Centaur, Bembo, Jenson, Garamond, Caslon

E.P. Goldschmidt, as explained by Stanley Morison, claimed that “the
supersession of black-letter was not due to any 'technical advance,' it
was the visible expression of a changed attitude of mind.” The
Renaissance was typified by an obsession with things “classical,” in the
Greco-Roman sense, which had major implications for typography. The
neo-classical letterforms were somewhat more condensed than the
Carolingian shapes, but much rounder and more expanded than the
blackletter.

Old style type is generally considered “warm” or friendly, thanks to its
origins in Renaissance humanism. The main characteristics of old style
typefaces are low contrast with diagonal stress, and cove or “bracketed”
serifs (serifs with a rounded join to the stem of the letter). The
earliest (Venetian or Renaissance) old style typefaces (originally
15th-16th Century) have very minimal contrast, and a sloped cross-bar on
the lower-case “e.” One such is Bruce Rogers' Centaur (1916), based on
Jenson. Similarly, Monotype's Bembo (1929) is based on the work of
Francesco Griffo, circa 1499.

Italics at this point were still independent designs, and were generally
used completely separately; a whole book could be set in italics.
Probably the most famous italic of the period is Arrighi's (1524), which
may be seen today as the italic form of Centaur. Likewise, the italic
form of Bembo is based on the italic of Tagliente (also 1524).

Later or baroque old style type (17th Century) generally has more
contrast, with a somewhat variable axis, and more slope of italic. The
most common examples are the types of Garamond and Caslon, many variant
revivals of which exist in digital form.

==== Transitional Type: Baskerville, Fournier

“Transitional” type is so-called because of its intermediate position
between old style and modern. The distinguishing features of
transitional typefaces include vertical stress and slightly higher
contrast than old style typefaces, combined with horizontal serifs. The
most influential examples are Philippe Grandjean's “Romain du Roi” for
the French Crown around 1702, Pierre Simon Fournier's work circa 1750,
and John Baskerville's work from 1757 onwards. Although today we
remember Baskerville primarily for his typeface designs, in his own time
people were much more impressed by his printing, which used an
innovative glossy paper and wide margins.

Later transitional types begin to move towards “modern” designs.
Contrast is accentuated, and serifs are more flattened. Current examples
of such are based on originals from approximately 1788-1810, and are
dominated by British isles designers, such as Richard Austin (Bell,
1788), William Martin (Bulmer) and Miller & Richard (Scotch Roman).

For currently available examples of transitional type, there are many
types which bear Baskerville's name, descending from one or another of
his designs. Less common today is P.S. Fournier's work, although several
versions of it are available in digital or metal form. Although Scotch
Roman has been a very common face in metal type usage since Monotype's
1920 revival, it is not a common digital face. Bell, on the other hand,
is included in a Microsoft Font Pack, and Bulmer has received more
attention since its revival by Monotype in late 1994.

==== Modern Type: Didot, Bodoni, Walbaum

“Modern” typefaces are distinguishable by their sudden-onset vertical
stress and strong contrast. Modern serifs and horizontals are very thin,
almost hairlines. Although they are very striking, these typefaces are
sometimes criticized as cold or harsh, and may not be quite as readable
for very extensive text work, such as books.

A number of designers, perhaps semi-independently, created the first
modern typefaces in the late 1700s and early 1800s. One of the first,
and ultimately the most influential, was Giambattista Bodoni, of Parma,
Italy. Ironically, historians of type often relate the development of
the “modern” letterforms to a then-current obsession with things
Roman—in this case the strong contrast and sharp serifs of classical
Roman inscriptions. Although similar interests

Today, the most common “modern” typefaces are the dozens of
reinterpretations of Bodoni's work (which itself evolved over time). One
of the most successful reinterpretations is the 1994 ITC Bodoni by Stone
et. al., featuring three different optical sizes. Although little is
seen of Didot, a reinterpretation by J.E. Walbaum (ca. 1800) sees
occasional use.

==== Sans Serif & Slab Serif

These type forms made their first appearances around 1815-1817. Both are
marked by simpler letterforms with (usually) relatively uniform stroke
weight, lacking significant contrast, often geometric in underlying
design.

The earliest forms of sans and slab typefaces tended to be heavy, often
monolithic, display faces, but there quickly evolved a wide range of
styles. Although the earliest designs are not much used today, their
descendants are common enough.

Sans Serif (a.k.a. Gothic or Grotesque)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Sans serif letters have no serifs, as the name suggests. The low
contrast and absence of serifs makes most sans typefaces harder to
follow for general reading. They are fine for a sentence, passable for a
paragraph, but are difficult to use well in, say, the text of a book.
The terminology of sans serif types can be confusing: essentially,
gothic or grotesque are both generic names for sans serif (although
Letter Gothic, confusingly, is more of a slab serif type).

In sans serif faces, the italics are often, although not always, simply
a sloped (mechanically obliqued) version of the roman letters, making
them totally subordinate to the roman.

By far the most common sans is Helvetica (1951, Miedinger), despite
being abhorred by many typographers. Helvetica does have the advantage
of coming in a huge range of weights and widths, which makes it
versatile, and its ubiquitous character makes it easy to match. Other
general-purpose sans serifs include Univers (Frutiger, 1952+), Arial
(Monotype), Franklin Gothic (M.F. Benton, 1903) and Frutiger (Frutiger,
1975).

Sprouting from the Art Deco movement in the 1920s and 30s (see Art
Deco), radical geometrical shapes began to be used as the basis for sans
serif designs.

There are a few other common sans faces which do not fall cleanly into
the above categories. Eric Gill's 1928 Gill Sans has an almost
architectural quality, and its greater contrast and humanistic design
makes it better-suited than most sans serif typefaces to setting bodies
of text. The same can perhaps be said of a number of late 20th Century
humanistic sans faces (see below)

Slab Serif (Egyptian)
+++++++++++++++++++++

These faces have block-like rectangular serifs, sticking out
horizontally or vertically, often the same thickness as the body
strokes. There is some debate about the origin of slab serif typefaces:
did they originate by somebody adding serifs to a sans face, or were
they conceived independently?

But even if they had a separate genesis as a family, it is certainly the
case that many of the most common and popular slab serif forms have been
created by adding slab serifs to sans faces by the same designer (e.g.
Adrian Frutiger's 1977 Glypha from his Univers, Herb Lubalin's 1974
Lubalin Graph from his Avant Garde). Other slab serif faces include
Berthold City (Trump, 1930), Memphis (Weiss, 1930), Serifa (Frutiger,
1968) and Silica (Stone, 1990).

The Clarendons or Ionics are an offspring of the slab serif typefaces in
which the serifs are bracketed. These are often used in newspaper work,
because their sturdy serifs hold up well under adverse printing
conditions. The most famous member of this sub-family is Century
Schoolbook (M.F. Benton, 1924-35).

==== Decorative & Display Type

Fat Faces
+++++++++

The “Fat Face” types were an offshoot of the moderns, intended for
display purposes (that is, to be attention-getting for use in large
sizes, particularly advertising). The first such types appeared from
1810-1820. They further exaggerated the contrast of modern typefaces,
with slab-like vertical lines and extra emphasis of any vertical serifs,
which often acquired a wedge shape. Bodoni Ultra, Normande and Elephant
are all examples of fat face types which are closely based on early to
mid-19th Century originals, and are available in digital form.

Wood Type
+++++++++

Wood type answered some of the needs of display advertising during the
industrial revolution. It derives its name from the fact that instead of
being made of metal, the type is carved from wood, cut perpendicular to
the grain. It is distinguished by strong contrasts, an overall dark
color, and a lack of fine lines. It may be unusually compressed or
extended. Many wood types have an “Old West” feel, because they are most
strongly associated with America in the 1870-1900 period. Some of the
wood types most widely available today are those in an Adobe pantheon
released in 1990, which includes Cottonwood, Ironwood and Juniper
(Buker, Lind & Redick).

Script, Brush, Italic & Freehand
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Script typefaces are based on handwriting; but often this is handwriting
with either a flexible steel nib pen, or a broad-edged pen, and is thus
unlike modern handwriting.

Some common scripts based on steel nib styles include Shelley (Carter,
1972), Coronet (Middleton, 1937-38), and Snell Roundhand (Carter, 1965,
based on Snell ca. 1694).

Script faces based more on the broad-edged tradition include the
contemporary Park Avenue (Smith, 1933).

There are also monoline scripts, which lack significant contrast in the
letter strokes. One such is Freestyle Script.

Brush typefaces look as if they were drawn with that instrument, which
most of them were, at least in the original design from which the
metal/film/digital face was created. Some of them resemble sign-painting
lettering, such as Balloon (Kaufmann, 1939), Brush Script (Smith, 1942),
and Dom Casual (Dom, 1952).

Brushwork can also be the basis for script, as with Present Script
(Sallaway, 1974) and Mistral (Excoffon, 1953)

Although modern typography typically relegates the italic to a second-
class citizenship subordinate to the roman, there are still some italic
typefaces designed as such in their own right. The best known is
doubtless Zapf Chancery (Zapf, 1979). Others include Medici Script
(Zapf, 1974) and Poetica (Slimbach, 1992).

Art Nouveau
+++++++++++

The late Victorian era, from 1880 to World War I, was characterized by
this ornamental style of art, with its organic, asymmetrical, intricate
and flowing lines. This “Art Nouveau” (French, meaning “new art”)
produced similarly distinctive typography, which saw a revival during
the 1960s.

There are a fair number of digital revivals of art nouveau faces,
although few are widely used. Some of the more common digital art
nouveau typefaces are Arnold Boecklin (Weisert, 1904), Artistik,
Desdemona, Galadriel and Victorian.

Art Deco
++++++++

If Art Nouveau was about finding beauty in organic intricacy, Art Deco
was perhaps about finding beauty in geometric simplicity. First
appearing in the 1920s and 30s, Art Deco made a comeback in the 1970s
and 80s as well.

Almost by definition, Art Deco meant sans serif type. The most common
such face is Avant Garde (1974, Lubalin), which is striking but hard to
read at length. A more graceful geometric sans is Futura (Renner,
1927-39). There are also more quirky faces in this category, such as
Kabel (Koch, 1927-30). A recent popular Art Deco display face is ITC
Anna (1991?).

==== Synthesis

Many of the most interesting typefaces of the twentieth century does not
fit any of the above categories, or at least not easily. The reason is
that they reflect not merely a single style, but cumulative experience,
and the merger of different styles. This is perhaps true even of that
most mundane of typefaces, Times New Roman (Lardent/Morison, 1931),
which has old style, transitional and modern elements.

Synthesis and Serif Type
++++++++++++++++++++++++

Although there are many practitioners of this synthesis, the most famous
is Hermann Zapf. His Palatino (1948) and Zapf Renaissance (1987) are
modern typefaces with the spirit of Renaissance letterforms. Melior
(1952), Zapf Book (1976), and Zapf International (1977) all reflect an
obsession with the super-ellipse, a rectangulated circle, as the basis
for letter shapes.

There have also been many modern revivals of old style which, while
close to old style in spirit, are not direct revivals of a specific
original, and show modern influences in the proportions or lettershapes.
These include the Granjon-inspired Galliard (Carter, 1978) and Minion
(Slimbach, 1989).

Synthesis and Sans Serif Type
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

After 1950, many designers began to explore a wide range of starting
points as the basis for sans serif designs. Aldo Novarese's Eurostile
(1964-5) takes sans serif forms and distorts them towards square and
rectangular shapes. Zapf's 1958 Optima is a masterful blend of sans
serif shapes with Roman and calligraphic influences. Shannon (Holmes &
Prescott Fishman, 1981) is a sans serif based on celtic manuscript
proportions. Several designers have reinterpreted ancient Greek
lettering for a modern sans serif alphabet: most popularly Carol
Twombly's Lithos (1989), and most recently Matthew Carter's Skia GX
(1994). Koch's Neuland (1930?) has a rough-hewn strength. Hans Eduard
Meier's Syntax (1969) is one of the earliest sans typefaces which
clearly echo renaissance roman letterforms. More recent sans faces often
draw on a humanistic background, from Spiekerman's Meta to Vereschagin's
Clear Prairie Dawn.

“Grunge” Typography
+++++++++++++++++++

The most recent typographic wave is one which has sometimes been called
grunge typography, after the musical movement originating in Seattle.
Although it is far too early to judge the ultimate impact of grunge, I
see the form as the merger of the industrial functionalist movement
called Bauhaus (contemporary with Art Deco, named after the
architectural school) with the wild, nihilistic absurdism of Dadaism.
Grunge, like many typographic/artistic movements before it, is a
rebellion; but this rebellion denies not only the relevance of anything
previous, but sometimes even the relevance of legibility itself, in the
belief that the medium *is* the message.

As grunge type designer Carlos Segura of T-26 says, “Typography is
beyond letters. Some fonts are so decorative, they almost become
'visuals' and when put in text form, they tell a story beyond the
words--a canvas is created by the personality of the collection of words
on the page.”

Grunge typefaces and typography are seen in magazines such as RayGun.
Some examples of grunge typography are the work of Barry Deck (Template
Gothic, Cyberotica, Truth), Nguyen's Droplet, Goren's Morire and Lin's
Tema Cantante.

=== Sources

==== Published Sources:

Although much of this information is based on prior knowledge, I also
actively consulted the following publications:

Bauermeister, Benjamin. A Manual of Comparative Typography. Van Nostrand
Reinhold Co., New York, NY: 1988. ISBN 0-442-21187-2.

Bringhurst, Robert. The Elements of Typographic Style. Hartley & Marks,
Vancouver, BC: 1992. ISBN 0-88179-033-8. The modern classic in the
field.

Byers, Steve. The Electronic Type Catalog. Bantam Books, New York: 1991.
ISBN 0-553-35446-9.

Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change.
Cambridge University Press, New York: 1979. ISBN 0-521-29955-1.

Harper, Laurel. “Thirstype: Quenching a Type Craving” in How: the
Bottomline Design Magazine, vol. 10, #1, Jan-Feb 1995. Although not
usually a thrilling magazine, had several pieces on typography in this
issue (see Segura, below).

Letraset Canada Limited. Letraset Product Manual. Letraset, Markham,
Ontario, Canada: 1985.

Meggs, Philip B. “American Type Founders Specimen Book & Catalog 1923”
in Print Magazine, vol. 48 #1, Jan-Feb 1994. Contains some interesting
info on the effects of industrialization on the type industry.

Sutton, James & Bartram, Alan. An Atlas of Typeforms. Percy, Lund,
Humphries & Co., Hertfordshire, UK: 1968. ISBN 1-85326-911-5.

Morison, Stanley & Day, Kenneth. The Typographic Book: 1450-1935.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1963.

Segura, Carlos & Nelson, Lycette. “Typography in Context: Never Take a
Font at Face Value” in How: the Bottomline Design Magazine, vol. 10, #1,
Jan-Feb 1995.

Tracy, Walter. Letters of Credit: a View of Type Design. David R. Godine
Co.: 1986.

Updike, Daniel Berkeley. Printing Types: Their History, Forms & Use.
Harvard Press: 1962.

Zapf, Hermann. “The Expression of Our Time in Typography” in Heritage of
the Graphic Arts. R.R. Bowker Company, New York: 1972. ISBN
0-8352-0213-5.

==== Personal Contributions:

In addition to written sources, which are identified above, I would like
to thank the following for their helpful comments and corrections (any
errors are, of course, my responsibility): Robert Hemenway, Mary Jo
Kostya, and Dan Margulis

== The Role of National Orthography in Font Design

This article was constructed from postings by Anders Thulin, Charles A.
Bigelow, and “fieseler” from Jan 1994.

An open question: what role does national orthography play in the
asthetics of a given font?

Given that uppercase letters occur more frequently in German than in
English, are German font designs better for typesetting German (because
the designer is more concious of the relationship between capitals and
lowercase)? Similarly, are French designs better for typesetting French
because the designer is more atuned to the appearance of accents?

Speaking of accents, there are apparently fonts in which the dots over
the “i” and “j” are not at the same height as the dieresis over accented
vowels. (Does anyone have an example of this?) Surely this is an error
that a designer accustomed to working with accented letters is unlikely
to make?

== Interesting Fonts

There's no end of interesting fonts, so this is really just a catch-all
category.

=== Highway Gothic

Kibo (James Parry) provides the following discussion of Highway Gothic:

Highway Gothic is The Font Company's name for their interpretation of
the font used on most official road signs in the United States. (The
Font Company added a lowercase to most styles.)

I don't think it has an official name. There is a government publication
which shows the fonts (revised in the seventies to make the heights
metric); I got a copy of it once, from a library specializing in
transportation, and digitized Series E(M) (normal-width bold caps with
lowercase, the only USDOT font with lowercase) for a special project. I
don't think the specs have changed since the seventies.

Besides E(M) with lowercase, there is a slightly lighter alphabet
without lowercase, and three condensed styles. I recall there was also a
set of really distorted letters for use in painting vehicle lanes, plus
a few symbols for bike paths etc. The alphabets included letters and
digits _only_–any periods or hyphens you see on signs are apparently
unofficial.

=== Where can I get extravagant initial caps?

Don Hosek writes:

I doubt that most decorated initials can be made to work in the type 1
format because of their complexity. Color only makes things worse.

One of the best choices for medieval and renaissance decorated alphabets
hasn't been mentioned yet: BBL Typographic (they have an ad on p. 39 of
Serif 1). A demo disk is available for $10, B&W alphabets are $50 each
and full color alphabets are $60.

....
BBL Typographic
137 Narrow Neck Road
Katoomba, NSW 2780
AUSTRALIA
011-61-47-826111
011-61-47-826144 FAX
....

also distributed by:

....
Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies
LN G99
State University of New York
Birmingham, NY 13902-6000
....

I know the work only from the Serif ad, but it's gorgeous there (even
nicer in color, although they decided not to spend the extra money for
color in their ad... only a select few in Katoomba & Claremont have seen
the ad in full color). Of course Serif-related disclaimers apply.

Jon Pastor contributes:

Check out the Aridi initials, color EPS initials, available on the
Monotype CD (and, presumably, on the Adobe CD as well, although they
don't advertise this; Monotype did, in a recent mailing).

To which Don Hosek amends:

The Aridi initials are part of the Type Designers of the World
collection and are available on the MT CD but not the Adobe CD. Adobe
has their own line of decorated initials available on their CD. Also see
the catalogs from FontHaus, FontShop and Precision Type.

If you want something really unique, why not hire a calligrapher. It may
be cheaper than you think.

Robert Green adds:

Although they might not be on the Adobe CD, the Fall 1994 Font &
Function advertises an Adobe "Initial Caps" collection of decorative
initial caps designed by Marwan Aridi.

== The Origin and Pronounciation of Font Names

Below each of the following font names, a suggested English
pronounciation is given. This information was collected from a
(relatively) long discussion on comp.fonts. If you disagree, or have
other suggestions, please let me know.

=== Arnold Boecklin

“Ar” as in car, “nold” as in “old” with an “n” on the front. “Boeck” is
tricker. The “oe” is actually an umlaut “o” in German, and the closest
sound to most English speakers is an “er”. So try “Berklin” if you want
to come close to the original. Otherwise, just say “Boklin”, with a long
o, like in “boat”.

=== Benguiat

Ben-Gat. This according to an ITC brochure.

=== Courier

I would pronounce Courier not like Jim Courier, but the French way:
Ku-rie, where “Ku” is pronounced like “coo”, only short, and “rie” is
pronounced “ree-eh”.

=== Didot

Stressed at the last syllable. “Dee-DOOH” (not nasal).

=== Fette Fraktur

“Fet” as in “get” with a “te” that rhymes with “way”. “Frak” rhymes with
“mock”, and “tur” with “tour”.

=== Fenice

Feh-nee'-chey

=== Garamond

“Gara-”: Use a french “r” instead of an english one. Both “a”s are
pronounced like the “u” in the word “up”. “-mond”: the last syllable is
stressed, and you don't pronounce the “n” and “d”, but the whole “ond”
is a nasal “o”. Hold your nose closed and say “Ooh”, then you get the
right sound. The “ant” in “Avant-Garde” is very similar to this sound,
it is a nasal situated between “a” and “o”.

=== Helvetica

Hell-veh'-ti-ka

=== Hobo

Bill Ricker contributes:

Wrapping link:https://plus.google.com/u/0/+BillRicker/posts/iaEEXDfqcvB?cfem=1[up a loose]
end from comp.fonts 23 years ago …
+
link:https://plus.google.com/114458584918177166947/posts[+Peter Zelchenko]
reports on the source and name of Hobo font:
https://lplatform.wordpress.com/2014/03/21/the-true-story-behind-the-hobo-font/

=== Koch Roman

Pronounced like scottish `Loch', but with K instead of L.

=== LaTeX

Lamport lists lah'-tech, lah-tech', lay'-tech and lay'-tecks as valid on
p.4. Last I talked to him he'd settled into lay'-tech which has always
been my pronunciation as well. Somewhere, I heard that LL does
explicitly rule out L.A.-tech, but he's from northern California which
explains a lot.

=== Mos Eisley

moss eyes-lee

=== Novarese

No-vahr-ay'-zay

=== Palatino

pa-la-TEEN-oh

=== Peignot

There's some contention here, suggested pronouncations:

pay-nyoh'

“P” like “P” in `Post”, “ei” like “a” in “fan”, “gn” like “n” in “noon”
plus “y” in “yes”, “ot” -- long, closed “o” (I don't know English
examples), stressed.

“P” like “P” in `Post”, “ei” like “a” in “many”, “gn” like “n” in “noon”
plus “y” in “yes”, “ot” -- long, closed “o” (I don't know English
examples), stressed.

=== Sabon

Sah-bon'

=== TeX

Rhymes with Blech, (as in “Blech, that tasted awfull!”)

=== Veljovic

Vel'-yo-vitch

=== Zapf

Like “tsapf”. The “a” is pronounced like a short version of the well
known tongue-depresser vowel “aaahhh”. Perhaps a better English analogy
would be the “o” in “hop” or “hops”.

== What is it?

This section identifies common names for several glyphs.

=== The “@” Character

The "at" sign or "commercial at" sign. In the past, it has also meant
"each" or "each at". Consider the following example supplied by Clive
Burton:

[cols=",,,,",]
|================================================
|Quantity |Unit |Item |Unit Price |Extended Price
|12 |reams |bond paper |@ 5.50 |66.00
|================================================

Here "@" means each at or simply each.

PostScript calls this the "at" sign.

=== The “#” Character

This mark has several common names: 'hash', 'hatch', 'pound sign', and
'octothorp' among them. The name "pound sign" is an Americanism that
causes some confusion in countries that use the pound for currency.

It was also noted that the # is a medieval abbreviation for Latin
“numerus” - it is a cursive 'n' with a horizontal slash through it, much
modified and abstracted.

One possible derivation of the name “octothorp” was provided by Charles
Bigelow:

""
… old English "thorp" meant 'hamlet' or 'village' (I'm not sure of the
difference, except maybe hamlet is smaller, as its apparent diminutive
suffix would suggest), and is derived from a much older Indo-European
word *treb- for 'dwelling', which turns out to mean 'beam' or 'timber'
in Latin "trabs", winding up as "trave" in Anglo-Latin, like
"architrave" - the beam resting on a column, or "trab-" as in
"trabecula" - a small supporting beam or bar. As Voltaire said,
etymology is a science in which the vowels count for nothing and the
consonants for very little.

So, maybe "octothorp" means "8-beams", which makes a kind of sense if we
take the 8 projections to be the thorps, or trabs or traves. Though it's
only a "quadrathorp" if we think that the beams connect.
""


Another explanation has it that the octothorp is a “thorp” surrounded by
eight cultivated fields.

Both of these etymologies received some skepticism amongst the readers
who commented on comp.fonts.

PostScript calls this the "numbersign".

=== The f-shaped “s”

The f-shaped s, called the long-s, is generally shaped something like
the modern integral sign (also sometimes called a long-s since it is, in
fact, an S for “summation” in calculus) with half a crossbar.

link:http://www.unicode.org/Unicode.charts/Small.Glyphs/01/U+017F.gif[Unicode sample glyph for long s (U+017F)].
link:http://www.unicode.org/Unicode.charts/Small.Glyphs/22/U+222B.gif[Unicode sample glyph for integral (U+222B)].

== Equivalent Font Names

Morgan S. Brilliant, Jon Pastor, and Frank F. Smith have each
contributed to the following list of equivalent font names.

The following table shows trade/common names and the equivalent names
used by other vendors. The vendor or trademark holder's name is shown in
parenthesis following each typeface name.

[cols=",",]
|=======================================================================
|Aachen Bold (Letraset) |Aardvark (Corel)

|Activa (Bitstream, Inc.) |Kuenstler 480

|Ad Lib |Adelaide (Corel)

|Adsans (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Humanist 970

|Akzidenz Grotesk (H. Berthold AG) |Gothic 725

|Albertus (Monotype Corporation plc) |Flareserif 821

|Aldine 401 (Monotype Corporation plc) |Bembo

|Aldine 721 (Monotype Corporation plc) |Plantin

|Algerian (S. Blake) |Algiers (Corel)

|Allegro |Alto (Corel)

|Amelia (VGC) |Amy (Corel)

|Americana (ATF) |Amherst (Corel)

|Antique Olive (Fonderie Olive) |Incised 901

|Arnold Bocklin |Arabia (Corel)

|Arquitectura (IC) |Architecture (Corel)

|Avant Garde (ITC) |Avalon (Corel)

|Badloc (IC) |Bedrock (Corel)

|Balloon (ATF) |Bassoon (Corel)

|Bamboo (ATF) |Bard (Corel)

|Bauhaus (ITC) |Bahamas (Corel)

|Bauhaus Heavy (ITC) |BahamasHeavy (Corel)

|Bauhaus Light (ITC) |BahamasLight (Corel)

|BeeBopp (IC) |Beehive (Corel)

|Bembo (Monotype Corporation plc) |Aldine 401

|Benguit (ITC) |Bangkok (Corel)

|Bernhard Tango (VGC) |BallroomTango (Corel)

|Bisque (VGC) |Brisk (Corel)

|Bitstream Arrust Black BT (Bitstream) |Bitstream Arrus Black BT
(WordPerfect)

|Block (H. Berthold AG) |Gothic 821

|Bodoni Campanile (Ludlow Industries (UK) Ltd.) |Modern 735

|Bodoni Poster |Bodnoff (Corel)

|Book Jacket (VGC) |Brochure (Corel)

|Bookman (ITC) |Brooklyn (Corel)

|Broadway (ATF) |Bravo (Corel)

|Broadway Engraved (ATF) |BravoEngraved (Corel)

|Brody (ATF) |Briquet (Corel)

|Brush 445 (H. Berthold AG) |Palette

|Brush 738 |Bison

|Brush Script (ATF) |Banff (Corel)

|Busorama (ITC) |Bosanova (Corel)

|Buster (Letraset) |Busker (Corel)

|Cable (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Geometric 231

|Calligraphic 421 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Codex

|Calligraphic 810 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Diotima

|Carolus Roman |Carleton (Corel)

|Carta (Adobe) |GeographicSymbols (Corel)

|Cartoon |Cancun (Corel)

|Cascade (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Freehand 471

|Cascade Script (Adobe) |Castanet (Corel)

|Casino (IC) |Carino (Corel)

|Caslon (ATF) |Casablanca (Corel)

|Caslon Antique (ATF) |CasablancaAntique (Corel)

|Caslon Open Face |CasperOpenFace (Corel)

|Caslon Openfacce (Bitstream) |Caslon Openface (WordPerfect)

|Centaur (Monotype Corporation plc) |Venetian 301

|Century Old Style |CenturionOld (Corel)

|Champagne (IC) |Campaign (Corel)

|Charlemagne (Adobe) |Charlesworth (Corel)

|Choc (Letraset) |Chalk (Corel)

|Choc (Fonderie Olive) |Staccato 555

|City (H. Berthold AG) |Square Slabserif 711

|Codex (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Calligraphic 421

|Comic Book (IC) |Cosmic (Corel)

|Comic Book Two (IC) |CosmicTwo (Corel)

|Cooper Black |Cupertino (Corel)

|CopperPlate Gothic (VGC) |CopperPot (Corel)

|Coronet (Ludlow Industries (UK) Ltd.) |Ribbon 131

|Cottonwood (Adobe) |Cottage (Corel)

|Croissant (Letraset) |Crescent (Corel)

|Decorative 035 (Tetterode Nederland (Lettergieterij Amsterdam)) |Profil

|Delphin |Dauphin (Corel)

|Diotima (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Calligraphic 810

|Dom Casual |DawnCastle (Corel)

|Dutch 801 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Times Roman

|Dutch 801 (Montype Corporation plc) |Times Roman

|Electra (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Transitional 521

|Elektrik (VGC) |Eklektic (Corel)

|Englische Screibschrift (H. Berthold AG) |English 157

|English 157 (H. Berthold AG) |Englische Screibschrift

|Enviro (Letraset) |Envision (Corel)

|Eras (ITC) |Erie (Corel)

|Eras Black (ITC) |ErieBlack (Corel)

|Eras Contour (ITC) |ErieContour (Corel)

|Eras Light (ITC) |ErieLight (Corel)

|Estro (ATF) |Expo (Corel)

|Eurostile (Adobe) |Euromode (Corel)

|Eurostile (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Square 721

|Exotic 350 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Peignot

|Fairfield (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Transitional 551

|Fette Fraktur (ITC) |Frankenstein (Corel)

|Firenze (ITC) |Florence (Corel)

|Flareserif 821 (Monotype Corporation plc) |Albertus

|Formal Script 421 (Bitstream, Inc.) |Mermaid

|Formal Script 421 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Ondine

|Franfurt (TFCo) |FrankHighlight (Corel)

|Frankfurt (TFCo) |FrankHighlight (Corel)

|Franklin Gothic (ITC) |FrankfurtGothhic (Corel)

|Franklin Gothic Heav (ITC) |FrankfurtGothicHeavy (Corel)

|Freehand 471 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Cascade

|Freehand 521 (Ludlow Industries (UK) Ltd.) |Mandate

|Freehand 575 |Jefferson

|Freehand 591 |Bingham Script

|Freestyle Script (Letraset) |Freeport (Corel)

|Fritz Quadrata (ITC) |France (Corel)

|Frutiger (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Humanist 777

|Futura 2 (FTNSA) |Fujiyama2 (Corel)

|Futura Black (Bauer) |FujiyamaBlack (Corel)

|Futura Cnd Extra Bol (FTNSA) |FujiyamaExtraBold (Corel)

|Futura Cnd Extra Bold (FTNSA) |FujiyamaExtraBold (Corel)

|Futura Cnd Light (FTNSA) |FujiyamaLight (Corel)

|Futura Condensed (FTNSA) |Fujiyama (Corel)

|Gallia |Galleria (Corel)

|Garamond (ITC) |Gatineau (Corel)

|Garamond, American |Garamond No. 3

|Garamond, Classic (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Sabon

|Garamond, Elegant (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Granjon

|Garamond, Italian (Officine Simoncini s.p.a.) |Simoncini Garamond

|Garamond, Original (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Stempel
Garamond

|Geometric 231 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Cable

|Geometric 415 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Metro

|Geometric 706 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Neuzeit Grotesk

|Geometric SlabSerif 703 Light (Bitstream) |GeometricSlabSerif703Light
(WordPerfect)

|Geometric Slabserif 703 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Memphis

|Geometric Slabserif 712 (Monotype Corporation plc) |Rockwell

|Geometric Slabserif 712 (Bitstream, Inc.) |Slate

|Gill Sans (Monotype Corporation plc) |Humanist 521

|Gill Sans Ultra Bold (Monotype) |GillbertUltraBold (Corel)

|Glasnost (C&G) |Czar (Corel)

|Glyphic Series (VGC) |Glacier (Corel)

|Gold Rush (ATF) |GoldMine (Corel)

|Gothic 725 (H. Berthold AG) |Akzidenz Grotesk

|Gothic 821 (H. Berthold AG) |Block

|Goudy Old Style |GoldenOldStyle (Corel)

|Granjon (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Garamond, Elegant

|Graphik (IC) |Griffon (Corel)

|Graphik Shadow (IC) |GriffonShadow (Corel)

|Hairpin (VGC) |Harpoon (Corel)

|Hammersmith (Bitstream, Inc.) |Humanist 521

|Hanseatic (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Swiss 924

|Harlow (Letraset) |Hollow (Corel)

|Hebrew (Letraset) |Alefbet (Corel)

|Helv. Cnd. Black (Linotype) |SwitzerlandCondBlack (Corel)

|Helv. Cond. Light (Linotype) |SwitzerlandCondLight (Corel)

|Helvetica |Arial (Microsoft)

|Helvetica (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Swiss 721

|Helvetica (Linotype) |Switzerland (Corel)

|Helvetica Black (Linotype) |SwitzerlandBlack (Corel)

|Helvetica Condensed (Linotype) |SwitzerlandCond (Corel)

|Helvetica Inserat (Linotype) |SwitzerlandInserat (Corel)

|Helvetica Light (Linotype) |SwitzerlandLight (Corel)

|Helvetica Narrow (Linotype) |SwitzerlandNarrow (Corel)

|Hobo |HomewardBound (Corel)

|Honda (ITC) |Heidelberg (Corel)

|Humanist 521 (Monotype Corporation plc) |Gill Sans

|Humanist 521 (Bitstream, Inc.) |Hammersmith

|Humanist 777 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Frutiger

|Humanist 970 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Adsans

|Incised 901 (Fonderie Olive) |Antique Olive

|Incised 901 (Bitstream, Inc.) |Provence

|Industrial 736 (Societea Nebiolo) |Torino

|Informal 011 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Neuland

|Ionic No. 5 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |News 701

|Ironwood (Adobe) |Ireland (Corel)

|Juniper (Adobe) |Jupiter (Corel)

|Kabel Bold |KabanaBold (Corel)

|Kabel Book (ITC) |KabanaBook (Corel)

|Kaufmann (Kingsley/ATF) |Koala (Corel)

|Korinna (ITC) |Korinthia (Corel)

|Kuenstler 480 (Bitstream, Inc.) |Activa

|Kuenstler 480 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Trump Medieval

|Kunstler Script (Linotype) |Kastler (Corel)

|L.C.D. (Letraset) |LiquidCrystal (Corel)

|Lapidary 333 (Monotype Corporation plc) |Perpetua

|Letter Gothic |Monospaced (Corel)

|Linoscript (Linotype) |Linus (Corel)

|Linotext (Linotype) |Lincoln (Corel)

|Lithos (Adobe) |Lithograph (Corel)

|Lithos Light (Adobe) |LithographLight (Corel)

|Machine (ITC) |Motor (Corel)

|Mandate (Ludlow Industries (UK) Ltd.) |Freehand 521

|Melior (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Zapf Elliptical 711

|Memphis (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Geometric Slabserif 703

|Mermaid (Bitstream, Inc.) |Formal Script 421

|Mermaid (Bitstream) |Merlin (Corel)

|Metro (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Geometric 415

|Micr (IC) |Keypunch (Corel)

|Mistral (M.Olive) |Mystical (Corel)

|Mistral (Fonderie Olive) |Staccato 222

|Modern 735 (Ludlow Industries (UK) Ltd.) |Bodoni Campanile

|Monospace 821 |Helvetica Monospaced

|Neuland (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Informal 011

|Neuland |Newfoundland (Corel)

|Neuzeit Grotesk (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Geometric 706

|New Baskerville (ITC) |Nebraska (Corel)

|New Century Schoolbo |NewBrunswick (Corel)

|New Century Schoolbook |NewBrunswick (Corel)

|New Yorker (IC) |NewOrder (Corel)

|New Yorker Engraved (IC) |NewOrderEngraved

|News 701 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Ionic No. 5

|Nuptial Script |Nuance (Corel)

|Ondine (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Formal Script 421

|Optima (Linotype) |Ottawa (Corel)

|Optima (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Zapf Humanist 601

|P.T.Barnum (Bitstream) |BigTop (Corel)

|Paintbrush (IC) |Palette (Corel)

|Palatino (Linotype) |PalmSprings (Corel)

|Palatino (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Zapf Calligraphic

|Palette (H. Berthold AG) |Brush 445

|Paper Clip (VGC) |Pipeline (Corel)

|Parisian (Kingsley/ATF) |Paragon (Corel)

|Park Avenue (ATF) |Paradise (Corel)

|Peignot (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Exotic 350

|Peignot (Linotype) |Penguin (Corel)

|Peignot Light (Linotype) |PenguinLight (Corel)

|Pepita (Monotype) |Pepper (Corel)

|Perpetua (Monotype Corporation plc) |Lapidary 333

|Plantin (Monotype Corporation plc) |Aldine 721

|Plaza (Letraset) |Playwright (Corel)

|Ponderosa (Adobe) |Posse (Corel)

|Post Antiqua (H.Berthold AG) |ProseAntique (Corel)

|Poster Bodoni |Bodoni-WP (WordPerfect)

|Present Script (Linotype) |President (Corel)

|Princetown (TFCo) |Indiana (Corel)

|Princetown (TFCo) |IndianaSolid (Corel)

|Profil (Tetterode Nederland (Lettergieterij Amsterdam)) |Decorative 035

|Provence (Bitstream, Inc.) |Incised 901

|Pump Triline (Letraset) |PowerLine (Corel)

|Quicksilver (D.Morris) |Quantum (Corel)

|Revival 565 |Berling

|Revue (Letraset) |Renfrew (Corel)

|Ribbon 131 (Ludlow Industries (UK) Ltd.) |Coronet

|Rockwell (Monotype Corporation plc) |Geometric Slabserif 712

|Sabon (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Garamond, Classic

|Simoncini Garamond (Officine Simoncini s.p.a.) |Garamond, Italian

|Slate (Bitstream, Inc.) |Geometric Slabserif 712

|Slogun (ZSoft) |Shogun (Corel)

|Sonata (Adobe) |MusicalSymbols (Corel)

|Souvenir (ITC) |Southern (Corel)

|Square 721 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Eurostile

|Square Slabserif 711 (H. Berthold AG) |City

|Squire (M.Neugebauer) |Scribe (Corel)

|Staccato 222 (Fonderie Olive) |Mistral

|Staccato 555 (Fonderie Olive) |Choc

|Stempel Garamond (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Garamond,
Original

|Stencil |Stamp (Corel)

|Stop (Nebiolo) |Scott (Corel)

|Surf Style (ITC) |Surreal (Corel)

|Swiss 721 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Helvetica

|Swiss 911 |Helvetica Compressed

|Swiss 921 |Helvetica Inserat

|Swiss 924 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Hanseatic

|Symbol (ITC) |GreekMathSYmbols (Corel)

|Symbol (ITC) |GreekMathSymbols (Corel)

|Tekton (Adobe) |Technical (Corel)

|Thor (VGC) |Viking (Corel)

|Thunderbird |ThunderBay (Corel)

|Tiffany (ITC) |Timpani (Corel)

|Tiffany Heavy (ITC) |TimpaniHeavy (Corel)

|Time (Linotype) |Toronto (Corel)

|Times Roman (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Dutch 801

|Times Roman (Monotype Corporation plc) |Dutch 801

|Torino (Societea Nebiolo) |Industrial 736

|Traffic (T.Hultgren) |Trafalgar (Corel)

|Transitional 521 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Electra

|Transitional 551 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Fairfield

|Trump Medieval (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Kuenstler 480

|Umbra (Kingsley/ATF) |Umbrella (Corel)

|Univers (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Zurich

|Univers Black (Linotype) |USABlack (Corel)

|Univers Light (Linotype) |USALight (Corel)

|University Roman (Letraset) |Unicorn (Corel)

|Uptight (ITC) |Uptown (Corel)

|VAG Rounded |Vogue (Corel)

|Venetian 301 (Monotype Corporation plc) |Centaur

|Vivaldi (VGC) |Vivienne (Corel)

|Zapf Calligraphic (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Palatino

|Zapf Chancery (ITC) |ZurichCalligraphic (Corel)

|Zapf Dingbats (ITC) |Dixieland (Corel)

|Zapf Elliptical 711 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Melior

|Zapf Humanist 601 (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Optima

|Zurich (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Univers

|Zurich (Linotype AG and/or its subsidiaries) |Univers
|=======================================================================

Some fonts are published by several vendors using the same name. This
table shows the typeface name and the vendors that supply it. Generally
this means that one vendor licensed the face from another.

[cols=",",]
|======================================================
|Augsburger Initials |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Baskerville Old Face |URW, Microsoft
|Bell MT |Monotype, Microsoft
|Bell MT Bold |Monotype, Microsoft
|Bell MT Italic |Monotype, Microsoft
|Bernhard Modern BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Bernhard Modern Bold BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Bernhard Modern Bold Italic BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Bernhard Modern Italic BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Bitstream Arrus BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Bitstream Arrus BT Bold |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Bitstream Arrus BT Bold Italic |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Bitstream Arrus BT Italic |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|BitstreamArrus Black BT Italic |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Blackletter 686 BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Braggadocio |Monotype, Microsoft
|BriemScript |Gunnlaugur SE Briem, Microsoft
|Britannic Bold |URW, Microsoft
|Brush 738 BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Castellar |Monotype, Microsoft
|Centaur |Monotype, Microsoft
|CommonBullets |Corel, Corel
|Contemporary Brush |Filmotype, Microsoft
|Contemporary Brush B |Filmotype, Microsoft
|Desdemona |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Eckmann |URW, Microsoft
|Edda |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Elephant |Carter & Cone Type Inc., Microsoft
|Elephant Italic |Carter & Cone Type Inc., Microsoft
|Engravers' Gothic BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Eurostile |URW, Microsoft
|Eurostile Bold |URW, Microsoft
|Futura Bold |URW, Microsoft
|Futura Medium |URW, Microsoft
|Futura Oblique |URW, Microsoft
|GeometricSlabSerifLight Italic |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Gill Sans Ultra Bold |Monotype, Microsoft
|Gradl |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Harrington |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Humanist 521 Condensed BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Humanist 521 Condensed Bold BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Humanist 521 Light BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Humanist 521 Light Italic BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Impact |Monotype, Microsoft
|Keystroke |Corel, Corel
|Kids |Corel, Corel
|Memorandum |ITC, Corel
|Mistral |URW, Microsoft
|New Caledonia |Linotype-Hell AG, Microsoft
|New Caledonia Bold |Linotype-Hell AG, Microsoft
|New Caledonia Italic |Linotype-Hell AG, Microsoft
|Old English Text MT |Monotype, Microsoft
|Onyx |Monotype, Microsoft
|Onyx BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|OzHandicraft BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Parade |Filmotype, Microsoft
|Peignot Medium |URW, Microsoft
|Playbill |URW, Microsoft
|Ransom |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Ransom Bold |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Ransom Bold Italic |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Ransom Italic |The Font Bureau, Inc., Microsoft
|Ribbon 131 BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Shelley Volante BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Stencil |URW, Microsoft
|Stop |URW, Microsoft
|Swiss 721 Black Extended BT |Bitstream, WordPerfect
|Wide Latin |URW, Microsoft
|Wingdings 2 |Bigelow & Holmes, Inc., Microsoft
|Wingdings 3 |Bigelow & Holmes, Inc., Microsoft
|======================================================

The following table summarizes typeface names for which no equivalent
name is known. The vendor is listed for each font. Many of these fonts
are builtin to the HP LaserJet line of printers.

[cols=",",]
|==============================================
|AdineKirnberg |shareware
|Albertus Extra Bold |Hewlett-Packard
|Albertus Medium |Hewlett-Packard
|American-Uncial-Normal |shareware
|Antique Olive |Hewlett-Packard
|Antique Olive Bold |Hewlett-Packard
|Antique Olive Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Broadway-WP |WordPerfect
|BroadwayEngraved-WP |WordPerfect
|CG Omega |Hewlett-Packard
|CG Omega Bold |Hewlett-Packard
|CG Omega Bold Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|CG Omega Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|CG Times |Hewlett-Packard
|CG Times Bold |Hewlett-Packard
|CG Times Bold Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|CG Times Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Century-WP |WordPerfect
|Clarendon Condensed |Hewlett-Packard
|CommercialScript-WP |WordPerfect
|CooperBlack |WordPerfect
|Coronet Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Eurostile-WP |WordPerfect
|Garamond Antiqua |Hewlett-Packard
|Garamond Halbfett |Hewlett-Packard
|Garamond Kursiv |Hewlett-Packard
|Garamond Kursiv Halbfett |Hewlett-Packard
|Hobo-WP |WordPerfect
|Letter Gothic |Hewlett-Packard
|Letter Gothic Bold |Hewlett-Packard
|Letter Gothic Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Marigold |Hewlett-Packard
|MurrayHill-WP |WordPerfect
|OldEnglish-WP |WordPerfect
|OldTown-WP |WordPerfect
|Stencil-WP |WordPerfect
|Symbol |Microsoft
|Times New Roman |Microsoft
|Univers |Hewlett-Packard
|Univers Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Univers Bold |Hewlett-Packard
|Univers Bold Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Univers Condensed |Hewlett-Packard
|Univers Condensed Bold |Hewlett-Packard
|Univers Condensed Bold Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Univers Condensed Italic |Hewlett-Packard
|Wingdings |Microsoft
|==============================================

== Digital Type Design Tools

This article was constructed from a posting by Charles A. Bigelow in Jun
1994 and a posting by Clive Bruton in Jan 1995.

=== How do the various digital type designing tools compare?

Charles A. Bigelow contributes:

Kris Holmes and I use _Ikarus_ and _IkarusM_, on the Macintosh, for most
of our work. We also use _Fontographer_ from time to time. Both are good
tools. We have not tried _TypeDesigner_. We have tried FontStudio, but
don't use it.

_IkarusM_ and _Fontographer_ user interfaces are different (modulo the
Mac interface). _IkarusM_ displays all “on-curve” points, treating the
curves as Hermite splines, which it converts to Beziers when making
Type1 or Type3 fonts, and to quadratic B-splines when making TrueType
fonts. On-curve points are helpful because they are intuitively more
like what a naive user would expect–to change a curve, change a point
on its contour. _Fontographer_ uses bezier on-curve and off-curve
control points. While these take a little more getting used-to,
experienced users have no problems manipulating curves by moving around
the off-curve control points.

_Fontographer_ uses curve fitting of scanned input and/or mouse
manipulation of points to get started on outlines. _IkarusM_ uses
graphics tablet input from drawn (or photographed) artwork or mouse
manipulation to get started.

Both provide auto-hinting capabilities (_IkarusM_ just included this in
version 3.0), but I haven't compared the quality of hinting between the
applications. Both provide automatic kerning capabilities, but again I
haven't compared the quality carefully. _IkarusM_ itself doesn't do
kerning, but version 3.0 comes with _Kernus_, a separate auto-kerning
system.

_Fontographer_ has more “goodies” in terms of the the different kinds of
output of fonts and screen fonts for different platforms (indeed, we
prefer it for making BDF bitmaps for UNIX platforms), and in the “finer
points” so to speak, of manipulating control points, whereas _IkarusM_
has more internal accuracy of resolution and more geometric symmetry
manipulation tools.

_Fontographer_ has auto-tracing capability, for fitting outlines to
scanned images, whereas _IkarusM_ needs a separate program, _LinusM_ to
do that. However, _LinusM_ adds several capabilities that _Fontographer_
does not provide.

I have forgotten the current list price for _Fontographer_ (sorry, but
I'm sure a _Fontographer_ user or someone from Altsys can provide it; is
it around $250 - $300?). _IkarusM_ + _Kernus_ + _LinusM_ is around $900,
but one should check with the URW office in Nashua, NH, to be certain of
that figure and of what is included.

There are many other differences between the programs, and perhaps other
users will want to point them out.

Which would I choose? Well, I have them both. Kris Holmes and I have
produced over 75 typefaces with _Ikarus_, though some of those were with
_Ikarus_ on VAX or Sun. We are comfortable with _Ikarus_ and feel that
it provides the highest level of precision and control, which for our
professional purposes is what we most value. Nevertheless, we find
_Fontographer_ to be very good tool and continually buy the updates and
test it and use it for various things when we feel that it is superior
to _Ikarus_ in particular respects. The best thing would be to test them
both, but unfortunately, one's preference for one or the other might not
manifest itself until one has gained more experience.

*Disclaimer:* We pay the standard prices and purchase our copies of
_IkarusM_ and _Fontographer_ and their upgrades, figuring that font tool
developers deserve to be paid for their work, just like font designers.
Bigelow & Holmes has font licensing arrangements with URW, the
developers of _Ikarus_, but we are not paid by them.

=== What about FontStudio?

[Editors note: This seems like valuable information for the FAQ, which
is why I've included it in a mostly wholesale fashion as Clive posted
it. In general, I'm not a big fan of anonymous contributions, but in
this case I've chosen to look the other way ;-). In particular, I've
made no attempt to disambiguate the personal pronouns in this section!]

Clive Bruton contributes the following:

I will now do a mini compendium of all my comments as FontStudio's chief
promoter, along with all the other people who support my view.

Sorry to those who are not credited, but others wish to remain
_anonymous_.

The following snippets are not necessarily in chronological order, names
have been changed to protect the guilty!

==== Is FontStudio Still Being Marketed?

Well it's one of those questions isn't it, it is certainly advertised in
the UK and as far as I know still supported by Letraset UK, but as you
have probably seen in _comp.fonts_ there has been some debate over the
relative merits of FontStudio vs Fontographer, my arguement suitably
backed-up by ...., and there is certainly some doubt over its imediate
future.

Personally I'd like to see it re-launched, if only because the market
needs some stimulation in order to produce ground-breaking products, and
one App/Vendor (Fontographer/Altsys) doesn't make for healthy
competition, as we've seen with Quark getting fat and lazy over their
upgrades for XPress with no perceived threat from PageMaker (that should
change real soon).

However it (FS) retails in the UK for $195.00 as opposed to
Fontographers $295.00, the current version is 2.0, as it has been for
over two years, but then again there have been no bug fixes for it, no
need!

I am sure that you could buy it in the US via Letraset directly, if you
wanted to. As far as marketing goes, I have just received a software
brochure from Camalot (UK software vendor) that partly showcases the
full Letraset range, and FontStudio is in there with the rest.

If you can't get it in the States, I'm sure I can arrange for it to be
shipped to you.

==== What About Bitmap Generation?

FontStudio's advantage is that they call the ATM API to get
ATM-generated bitmaps. Fontographer generates their own—and the
results are much heavier and more messy.

Yes, you're right, I did know, FS has 3 options on this, its own
generation, which like Fontographers are rather heavy, ATM's which are
just about perfect, and True Type, which from memory–since I only
tried it a couple of times–tend to be a bit quirky.

==== FontStudio is Better [than Fontographer]?

Could you elaborate on that? Why do you suppose that FontStudio
disappeared, and Fontographer is still around? Not being belligerent or
challenging you, since I'm totally unfamiliar with FontStudio—but
Altsys is not exactly a Goliath compared to Letraset, in terms of the
size of the company or the depth of its pockets, and I'm curious why
such a good product from a big font vendor disappeared.

I'll chime in here if that's OK. I'm very glad FontStudio came along;
Fontographer was resting on its laurels until it got serious
competition. Many people prefer FontStudio's drawing interface (which is
like Illustrator's) to Fontographer's (which is, unsurprisingly, like
Freehand's). There are other parts to the interface debate as well, like
zoom factors, dialog complexity, and so forth, although much of it may
be a matter of taste.

XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX was one of FontStudio's beta sites, and they used a lot
of our advice, so it's not accidental that our designers still tend to
use it until it's time to move the fonts over to the SPARCs. I use it
when I'm playing with designs at home.

It looks like Letraset didn't know how to promote what it had. It's
worth noting that they'yre divesting themselves of their other graphics
apps, not just FontStudio. At any rate, the biggest hurdle was that
Fontographer had a four-year head start, capturing the hearts of nearly
everyone who was serious about making fonts. Nobody wants to relearn an
app, so the competition has to be darned good to get people to switch.
It has happened (witness XPress vs PageMaker) but it's not easy. Another
problem was that Letraset didn't develop FontStudio, they bought it.
They and the developers (now Ares, the FontMonger people) didn't get
along well, and that led to a painfully slow upgrade process. Altsys got
themselves in gear, and started adding features right & left, outdoing
FontStudio on nearly every count (technically, not necessarily in terms
of user experience).

I can only agree with what XXX has said above, plus...

Just some more background info on FontStudio/Letraset. Unfortunately
Letraset never seemed to get the knack of selling software, some
examples of this are, Letraset were originally the distributors of Adobe
products in the UK - a job that is now carried out by Principal, they
also had a full complement of other Mac software - which seems to have
reverted to its authors or disappeared alltogether, it has recently
released the first commercially available Plug-In for Illustrator, a
derivative of LetraStudio, to allow the creation of pespective and
envelope effects - who knows about this?

Back to the FontStudio/Fontographer debate, I have _tried_ to use
Fontographer, but as discussed above, the interface is just awful (as an
aside, does anyone like FreeHand 4.0's interface?), FontStudios use of
colour, pop-up menus, and general look and feel is completely at home
alongside XPress and Illustrator, where as Fontographer, well... isn't!

All the buzzers and bells are there in Fontographer, but can you really
take seriously a program that won't allow you to draught your own
bitmaps! (Yeah I have heard about ATM, that's not the point).

Also, and I won't lay the blame _solely_ at the door of Altsys, whenever
I get asked to sort out a problem font, it's always been created with
Fontographer. Now whether that is down to Altsys Fontographer (AF)
trying to things that aren't exactly kosher (like using even/odd rule
instead of winding), or the skill of the digitisers who did the work
I've never been able to fathom, but it's usually fixed by importing into
FontStudio (FS) and re-saving.

I hope that Ares do something with FS, otherwise sooner or later I am
going to need a new program (I have found a minor screen draw problem
when used with System 7.5, I've yet to try it on a PowerMac [anyone
wants me to, I can send you results]), I have already looked around, and
seem _a lot_ more likely to buy Ikarus M than AF, it's really that bad.

I would also like to comment on XXX's point about XPress/PageMaker, I
hope that Adobe can make a real killer of PM, and reverse that trend,
XPress>PM that'll be the way to go!

Just to take Xpress' name in vain again (I don't hate the program, just
the smug bastards that want to charge me $190.00 to get a native
version, and only a native version - Adobe has got the right attitude
there!) "XPress" is to "Word for Windows", what "FontStudio" is to
"Fontographer".

QED. Maybe not!

If all those in favour send me a *YAY* (addressed to
`typonaut@d-supp.demon.co.uk`) and someone sends me e-addresses for Ares
and Letraset, then I will forward them your support, who knows Altsys
may even decide to pack the whole Fontographer game in, and Adobe can
relaunch FontStudio!

== Type Design Firms

Although it has been a long time coming, it seems only natural that the
_comp.fonts_ FAQ should provide a brief summary of what the various type
design firms are producing.

=== Carter & Cone Type, Inc.

This description was constructed from postings by Don Hosek, Erik-Jan
Vens, and David Lemon in Sep, 1993.

....
Carter & Cone Type Inc.
2155 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02140
617-576-0398 or 800-952-2129
617-354-4146 FAX
....

We begin with Carter & Cone not because I think they should be first,
but because I already have a few articles about them (I probably saved
the articles more because they were about Galliard, which I have a
fondness for, than anything else). Please contribute summaries about
other foundries (even the foundries themselves are encouraged to
contribute, althought I'd appreciate it if the advertising overtones
were kept to a dull roar ;-).

==== Galliard

[Editors note: With appologies to C&C, I have the following snippet:

....
>> the designer. He's in business for himself now as half of Carter &
>> Cone (800 952 2129 voice), and he's worked Galliard over yet again.
>> Should be cool. Support your local type designer.
....

Which half of C&C does this refer to?]

Don Hosek says:

The specimen sheets arrived in the mail today (along with the newest
Font & Function). Carter & Cone has three faces: _ITC Galliard_ [CC]
which is a family of 11 fonts. The bad news is that assignments of
characters into expert sets and basic fonts is non-standard (the basic
font is missing fi and fl). The good news is that the fonts are quite
inexpensive. The whole set can be purchased for $150. The font is a
single weight only (if bold is strictly necessary, _Bitstream Galliard
Bold_ is consistent in height and can be mixed. On the other hand,
designers need to learn to avoid the crutch of bold face on their
pages). It is possible to purchase just those parts of the package which
are needed. Those able to mix fonts on their own might be able to get a
decent selection for less than $150.

==== Sophia

Don continues,

The second font is Sophia which is a kind of quirky all-caps display
face. It features a number of upper case ligatures [!] and has a kind of
Greek-Turkish feel to it (not suprising, really: the face is based in
6th c. Constantinople letterforms). When I first saw this, I didn't like
it, but it does grow on one. The price on this is $60.

==== Mantinia

Finally, Don concludes,

The third font is Mantinia which is a more traditional display roman
with some interesting features: e.g., more uppercase ligatures and an
alphabet with superior caps in place of lower case (the La of LaTeX
could be typeset without kerns or raises using this alphabet). Again,
this took some growing on one, but I'm more accepting of this (and can
even imagine using it for real work). The price on this is $60.

== What does `lorem ipsum dolor' mean?

`Lorem ipsum dolor' is the first part of a nonsense paragraph sometimes
used to demonstrate a font. It has been well established that if you
write _anything_ as a sample, people will spend more time reading the
copy than looking at the font. The “gibberish” below is sufficiently
like ordinary text to demonstrate a font but doesn't distract the
reader. Hopefully.

Rick Pali submits the following from _Before and After Magazine_, Volume
4 Number 2.:

[quote]

After telling everyone that Lorem ipsum, the nonsensical text that comes
with PageMaker, only looks like Latin but actually says nothing, I heard
from Richard McClintock, publication director at the Hampden-Sydney
College in Virginia, who had enlightening news:

"Lorem ipsum is latin, slightly jumbled, the remnants of a passage from
Cicero's _de Finibus_ 1.10.32, which begins 'Neque porro quisquam est
qui dolorem ipsum quia dolor sit amet, consectetur, adipisci velit...'
[There is no one who loves pain itself, who seeks after it and wants to
have it, simply because it is pain.]. [de Finibus Bonorum et Malorum,
written in 45 BC, is a treatise on the theory of ethics very popular in
the Renaisance.]

"What I find remarkable is that this text has been the industry's
standard dummy text ever since some printed in the 1500s took a galley
of type and scambled it to make a type specemin book; it has survived
not only four centuries of letter-by-letter resetting but even the leap
into electronic typesetting, essentially unchanged except for an
occational 'ing' or 'y' thrown in. It's ironic that when the
then-understood Latin was scrambled, it became as incomprehensible as
Greek; the phrase 'it's Greek to me' and 'greeking' have common semantic
roots!"

[unquote]

=== One Example of Lorem Ipsum Dolor

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetaur adipisicing elit, sed do
eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad
minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip
ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in
voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur
sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt
mollit anim id est laborum Et harumd und lookum like Greek to me, dereud
facilis est er expedit distinct. Nam liber te conscient to factor tum
poen legum odioque civiuda. Et tam neque pecun modut est neque nonor et
imper ned libidig met, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed ut labore et
dolore magna aliquam makes one wonder who would ever read this stuff?
Bis nostrud exercitation ullam mmodo consequet. Duis aute in voluptate
velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. At vver eos et
accusam dignissum qui blandit est praesent luptatum delenit aigue
excepteur sint occae. Et harumd dereud facilis est er expedit distinct.
Nam libe soluta nobis eligent optio est congue nihil impedit doming id
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, set eiusmod
tempor incidunt et labore et dolore magna aliquam. Ut enim ad minim
veniam, quis nostrud exerc. Irure dolor in reprehend incididunt ut
labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud
exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat.
Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse molestaie
cillum. Tia non ob ea soluad incommod quae egen ium improb fugiend.
Officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum Et harumd dereud facilis est
er expedit distinct. Nam liber te conscient to factor tum poen legum
odioque civiuda et tam. Neque pecun modut est neque nonor et imper ned
libidig met, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed ut labore et dolore magna
aliquam is nostrud exercitation ullam mmodo consequet. Duis aute in
voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. At vver eos
et accusam dignissum qui blandit est praesent. Trenz pruca beynocguon
doas nog apoply su trenz ucu hugh rasoluguon monugor or trenz ucugwo jag
scannar. Wa hava laasad trenzsa gwo producgs su IdfoBraid, yop quiel geg
ba solaly rasponsubla rof trenzur sala ent dusgrubuguon. Offoctivo
immoriatoly, hawrgasi pwicos asi sirucor.Thas sirutciun applios tyu
thuso itoms ghuso pwicos gosi sirucor in mixent gosi sirucor ic mixent
ples cak ontisi sowios uf Zerm hawr rwivos. Unte af phen neige pheings
atoot Prexs eis phat eit sakem eit vory gast te Plok peish ba useing
phen roxas. Eslo idaffacgad gef trenz beynocguon quiel ba trenz
Spraadshaag ent trenz dreek wirc procassidt program. Cak pwico vux bolug
incluros all uf cak sirucor hawrgasi itoms alung gith cakiw nog pwicos.
Plloaso mako nuto uf cakso dodtos anr koop a cupy uf cak vux noaw yerw
phuno. Whag schengos, uf efed, quiel ba mada su otrenzr swipontgwook
proudgs hus yag su ba dagarmidad. Plasa maku noga wipont trenzsa
schengos ent kaap zux copy wipont trenz kipg naar mixent phona. Cak
pwico siructiun ruos nust apoply tyu cak UCU sisulutiun munityuw uw cak
UCU-TGU jot scannow. Trens roxas eis ti Plokeing quert loppe eis yop
prexs. Piy opher hawers, eit yaggles orn ti sumbloat alohe plok. Su havo
loasor cakso tgu pwuructs tyu InfuBwain, ghu gill nug bo suloly
sispunsiblo fuw cakiw salo anr ristwibutiun. Hei muk neme eis loppe.
Treas em wankeing ont sime ploked peish rof phen sumbloat syug si phat
phey gavet peish ta paat ein pheeir sumbloats. Aslu unaffoctor gef cak
siructiun gill bo cak spiarshoot anet cak GurGanglo gur pwucossing
pwutwam. Ghat dodtos, ig pany, gill bo maro tyu ucakw suftgasi pwuructs
hod yot tyubo rotowminor. Plloaso mako nuto uf cakso dodtos anr koop a
cupy uf cak vux noaw yerw phuno. Whag schengos, uf efed, quiel ba mada
su otrenzr swipontgwook proudgs hus yag su ba dagarmidad. Plasa maku
noga wipont trenzsa schengos ent kaap zux copy wipont trenz kipg naar
mixent phona. Cak pwico siructiun ruos nust apoply tyu cak UCU
sisulutiun munityuw uw cak UCU-TGU jot scannow. Trens roxas eis ti
Plokeing quert loppe eis yop prexs. Piy opher hawers, eit yaggles orn ti
sumbloat alohe plok. Su havo loasor cakso tgu pwuructs tyu.

[This version was found on CompuServe. It differs from other versions I
have seen in print, increasingly so as you go along. It almost looks
computer-generated, doesn't it?]
